11.3 Hash functions                                                                  267


expectation, therefore, the expected time for the entire sequence of n operations
is O.n/. Since each operation takes .1/ time, the ‚.n/ bound follows.

Designing a universal class of hash functions
It is quite easy to design a universal class of hash functions, as a little number
theory will help us prove. You may wish to consult Chapter 31 ﬁrst if you are
unfamiliar with number theory.
   We begin by choosing a prime number p large enough so that every possible
key k is in the range 0 to p  1, inclusive. Let Zp denote the set f0; 1; : : : ; p  1g,
and let Zp denote the set f1; 2; : : : ; p  1g. Since p is prime, we can solve equa-
tions modulo p with the methods given in Chapter 31. Because we assume that the
size of the universe of keys is greater than the number of slots in the hash table, we
have p > m.
   We now deﬁne the hash function hab for any a 2 Zp and any b 2 Zp using a
linear transformation followed by reductions modulo p and then modulo m:
hab .k/ D ..ak C b/ mod p/ mod m :                                                (11.3)
For example, with p D 17 and m D 6, we have h3;4 .8/ D 5. The family of all
such hash functions is
        ˚
Hpm D hab W a 2 Zp and b 2 Zp :                                    (11.4)
Each hash function hab maps Zp to Zm . This class of hash functions has the nice
property that the size m of the output range is arbitrary—not necessarily prime—a
feature which we shall use in Section 11.5. Since we have p  1 choices for a
and p choices for b, the collection Hpm contains p.p  1/ hash functions.

Theorem 11.5
The class Hpm of hash functions deﬁned by equations (11.3) and (11.4) is universal.

Proof Consider two distinct keys k and l from Zp , so that k ¤ l. For a given
hash function hab we let
r D .ak C b/ mod p ;
s D .al C b/ mod p :
We ﬁrst note that r ¤ s. Why? Observe that
r  s  a.k  l/ .mod p/ :
It follows that r ¤ s because p is prime and both a and .k  l/ are nonzero
modulo p, and so their product must also be nonzero modulo p by Theorem 31.6.
Therefore, when computing any hab 2 Hpm , distinct inputs k and l map to distinct
