682        Chapter 24 Single-Source Shortest Paths


           24-6 Bitonic shortest paths
           A sequence is bitonic if it monotonically increases and then monotonically de-
           creases, or if by a circular shift it monotonically increases and then monotonically
           decreases. For example the sequences h1; 4; 6; 8; 3; 2i, h9; 2; 4; 10; 5i, and
           h1; 2; 3; 4i are bitonic, but h1; 3; 12; 4; 2; 10i is not bitonic. (See Problem 15-3 for
           the bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman problem.)
              Suppose that we are given a directed graph G D .V; E/ with weight function
           w W E ! R, where all edge weights are unique, and we wish to ﬁnd single-source
           shortest paths from a source vertex s. We are given one additional piece of infor-
           mation: for each vertex  2 V , the weights of the edges along any shortest path
           from s to  form a bitonic sequence.
              Give the most efﬁcient algorithm you can to solve this problem, and analyze its
           running time.


Chapter notes

           Dijkstra’s algorithm [88] appeared in 1959, but it contained no mention of a priority
           queue. The Bellman-Ford algorithm is based on separate algorithms by Bellman
           [38] and Ford [109]. Bellman describes the relation of shortest paths to difference
           constraints. Lawler [224] describes the linear-time algorithm for shortest paths in
           a dag, which he considers part of the folklore.
              When edge weights are relatively small nonnegative integers, we have more ef-
           ﬁcient algorithms to solve the single-source shortest-paths problem. The sequence
           of values returned by the E XTRACT-M IN calls in Dijkstra’s algorithm monoton-
           ically increases over time. As discussed in the chapter notes for Chapter 6, in
           this case several data structures can implement the various priority-queue opera-
           tions more efﬁciently than a binary heap or a Fibonacci heap. Ahuja,
                                                                              p      Mehlhorn,
           Orlin, and Tarjan [8] give an algorithm that runs in O.E C V lg W / time on
           graphs with nonnegative edge weights, where W is the largest weight of any edge
           in the graph. The best bounds are by Thorup [337], who gives an algorithm that
           runs in O.E lg lg V˚ / time, and by Raman [291], who gives an algorithm that runs
           in O E C V min .lg V /1=3C ; .lg W /1=4C time. These two algorithms use an
           amount of space that depends on the word size of the underlying machine. Al-
           though the amount of space used can be unbounded in the size of the input, it can
           be reduced to be linear in the size of the input using randomized hashing.
              For undirected graphs with integer weights, Thorup [336] gives an O.V C E/-
           time algorithm for single-source shortest paths. In contrast to the algorithms men-
           tioned in the previous paragraph, this algorithm is not an implementation of Dijk-
