           12.4 Randomly built binary search trees                                         299


           Exercises

           12.3-1
           Give a recursive version of the T REE -I NSERT procedure.

           12.3-2
           Suppose that we construct a binary search tree by repeatedly inserting distinct val-
           ues into the tree. Argue that the number of nodes examined in searching for a
           value in the tree is one plus the number of nodes examined when the value was
           ﬁrst inserted into the tree.

           12.3-3
           We can sort a given set of n numbers by ﬁrst building a binary search tree contain-
           ing these numbers (using T REE -I NSERT repeatedly to insert the numbers one by
           one) and then printing the numbers by an inorder tree walk. What are the worst-
           case and best-case running times for this sorting algorithm?

           12.3-4
           Is the operation of deletion “commutative” in the sense that deleting x and then y
           from a binary search tree leaves the same tree as deleting y and then x? Argue why
           it is or give a counterexample.

           12.3-5
           Suppose that instead of each node x keeping the attribute x:p, pointing to x’s
           parent, it keeps x:succ, pointing to x’s successor. Give pseudocode for S EARCH,
           I NSERT, and D ELETE on a binary search tree T using this representation. These
           procedures should operate in time O.h/, where h is the height of the tree T . (Hint:
           You may wish to implement a subroutine that returns the parent of a node.)

           12.3-6
           When node ´ in T REE -D ELETE has two children, we could choose node y as
           its predecessor rather than its successor. What other changes to T REE -D ELETE
           would be necessary if we did so? Some have argued that a fair strategy, giving
           equal priority to predecessor and successor, yields better empirical performance.
           How might T REE -D ELETE be changed to implement such a fair strategy?



? 12.4 Randomly built binary search trees

           We have shown that each of the basic operations on a binary search tree runs
           in O.h/ time, where h is the height of the tree. The height of a binary search
