1190   Appendix C    Counting and Probability


          An event is a subset1 of the sample space S. For example, in the experiment of
       ﬂipping two coins, the event of obtaining one head and one tail is fHT; TH g. The
       event S is called the certain event, and the event ; is called the null event. We say
       that two events A and B are mutually exclusive if A \ B D ;. We sometimes treat
       an elementary event s 2 S as the event fsg. By deﬁnition, all elementary events
       are mutually exclusive.

       Axioms of probability
       A probability distribution Pr fg on a sample space S is a mapping from events of S
       to real numbers satisfying the following probability axioms:
       1. Pr fAg  0 for any event A.
       2. Pr fSg D 1.
       3. Pr fA [ Bg D Pr fAg C Pr fBg for any two mutually exclusive events A
          and B. More generally, for any (ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite) sequence of events
          A1 ; A2 ; : : : that are pairwise mutually exclusive,
             (          )
               [              X
          Pr       Ai D           Pr fAi g :
                 i             i


       We call Pr fAg the probability of the event A. We note here that axiom 2 is a
       normalization requirement: there is really nothing fundamental about choosing 1
       as the probability of the certain event, except that it is natural and convenient.
          Several results follow immediately from these axioms and basic set theory (see
       Section B.1). The null event ; has probability Pr f;g D 0. If A  B, then
       Pr fAg  Pr ˚ fBg. Using A to denote the event S  A (the complement of A),
       we have Pr A D 1  Pr fAg. For any two events A and B,
       Pr fA [ Bg D Pr fAg C Pr fBg  Pr fA \ Bg                                                    (C.12)
                   Pr fAg C Pr fBg :                                                               (C.13)


       1 For a general probability distribution, there may be some subsets of the sample space S that are not

       considered to be events. This situation usually arises when the sample space is uncountably inﬁnite.
       The main requirement for what subsets are events is that the set of events of a sample space be closed
       under the operations of taking the complement of an event, forming the union of a ﬁnite or countable
       number of events, and taking the intersection of a ﬁnite or countable number of events. Most of
       the probability distributions we shall see are over ﬁnite or countable sample spaces, and we shall
       generally consider all subsets of a sample space to be events. A notable exception is the continuous
       uniform probability distribution, which we shall see shortly.
