14          Augmenting Data Structures




            Some engineering situations require no more than a “textbook” data struc-
            ture—such as a doubly linked list, a hash table, or a binary search tree—but many
            others require a dash of creativity. Only in rare situations will you need to cre-
            ate an entirely new type of data structure, though. More often, it will sufﬁce to
            augment a textbook data structure by storing additional information in it. You can
            then program new operations for the data structure to support the desired applica-
            tion. Augmenting a data structure is not always straightforward, however, since the
            added information must be updated and maintained by the ordinary operations on
            the data structure.
               This chapter discusses two data structures that we construct by augmenting red-
            black trees. Section 14.1 describes a data structure that supports general order-
            statistic operations on a dynamic set. We can then quickly ﬁnd the ith smallest
            number in a set or the rank of a given element in the total ordering of the set.
            Section 14.2 abstracts the process of augmenting a data structure and provides a
            theorem that can simplify the process of augmenting red-black trees. Section 14.3
            uses this theorem to help design a data structure for maintaining a dynamic set of
            intervals, such as time intervals. Given a query interval, we can then quickly ﬁnd
            an interval in the set that overlaps it.


14.1 Dynamic order statistics

            Chapter 9 introduced the notion of an order statistic. Speciﬁcally, the ith order
            statistic of a set of n elements, where i 2 f1; 2; : : : ; ng, is simply the element in the
            set with the ith smallest key. We saw how to determine any order statistic in O.n/
            time from an unordered set. In this section, we shall see how to modify red-black
            trees so that we can determine any order statistic for a dynamic set in O.lg n/ time.
            We shall also see how to compute the rank of an element—its position in the linear
            order of the set—in O.lg n/ time.
