22   Chapter 2 Getting Started


         a pointer to the array is passed, rather than the entire array, and changes to
         individual array elements are visible to the calling procedure.
        A return statement immediately transfers control back to the point of call in
         the calling procedure. Most return statements also take a value to pass back to
         the caller. Our pseudocode differs from many programming languages in that
         we allow multiple values to be returned in a single return statement.
        The boolean operators “and” and “or” are short circuiting. That is, when we
         evaluate the expression “x and y” we ﬁrst evaluate x. If x evaluates to FALSE,
         then the entire expression cannot evaluate to TRUE, and so we do not evaluate y.
         If, on the other hand, x evaluates to TRUE, we must evaluate y to determine the
         value of the entire expression. Similarly, in the expression “x or y” we eval-
         uate the expression y only if x evaluates to FALSE. Short-circuiting operators
         allow us to write boolean expressions such as “x ¤ NIL and x:f D y” without
         worrying about what happens when we try to evaluate x:f when x is NIL.
        The keyword error indicates that an error occurred because conditions were
         wrong for the procedure to have been called. The calling procedure is respon-
         sible for handling the error, and so we do not specify what action to take.

     Exercises

     2.1-1
     Using Figure 2.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of I NSERTION -S ORT on the
     array A D h31; 41; 59; 26; 41; 58i.

     2.1-2
     Rewrite the I NSERTION -S ORT procedure to sort into nonincreasing instead of non-
     decreasing order.

     2.1-3
     Consider the searching problem:
     Input: A sequence of n numbers A D ha1 ; a2 ; : : : ; an i and a value .
     Output: An index i such that  D AŒi or the special value NIL if  does not
       appear in A.
     Write pseudocode for linear search, which scans through the sequence, looking
     for . Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct. Make sure that
     your loop invariant fulﬁlls the three necessary properties.

     2.1-4
     Consider the problem of adding two n-bit binary integers, stored in two n-element
     arrays A and B. The sum of the two integers should be stored in binary form in
