640   Chapter 23 Minimum Spanning Trees


      a. Let T be the set of edges returned by MST-R EDUCE, and let A be the minimum
         spanning tree of the graph G 0 formed by the call MST-P RIM .G 0 ; c 0 ; r/, where c 0
         is the weight attribute on the edges of G 0 :E and r is any vertex in G 0 :V. Prove
         that T [ f.x; y/:orig0 W .x; y/ 2 Ag is a minimum spanning tree of G.

      b. Argue that jG 0 :Vj  jV j =2.

      c. Show how to implement MST-R EDUCE so that it runs in O.E/ time. (Hint:
         Use simple data structures.)

      d. Suppose that we run k phases of MST-R EDUCE, using the output G 0 produced
         by one phase as the input G to the next phase and accumulating edges in T .
         Argue that the overall running time of the k phases is O.kE/.

      e. Suppose that after running k phases of MST-R EDUCE, as in part (d), we run
         Prim’s algorithm by calling MST-P RIM .G 0 ; c 0 ; r/, where G 0 , with weight at-
         tribute c 0 , is returned by the last phase and r is any vertex in G 0 :V. Show how
         to pick k so that the overall running time is O.E lg lg V /. Argue that your
         choice of k minimizes the overall asymptotic running time.

      f. For what values of jEj (in terms of jV j) does Prim’s algorithm with preprocess-
         ing asymptotically beat Prim’s algorithm without preprocessing?

      23-3 Bottleneck spanning tree
      A bottleneck spanning tree T of an undirected graph G is a spanning tree of G
      whose largest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees of G. We say that
      the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is the weight of the maximum-weight
      edge in T .

      a. Argue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.

      Part (a) shows that ﬁnding a bottleneck spanning tree is no harder than ﬁnding
      a minimum spanning tree. In the remaining parts, we will show how to ﬁnd a
      bottleneck spanning tree in linear time.

      b. Give a linear-time algorithm that given a graph G and an integer b, determines
         whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at most b.

      c. Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear-time algorithm for
         the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. (Hint: You may want to use a subroutine
         that contracts sets of edges, as in the MST-R EDUCE procedure described in
         Problem 23-2.)
