16.4 Matroids and greedy methods                                                   441


  We now prove that G REEDY returns an optimal subset.

Lemma 16.7 (Matroids exhibit the greedy-choice property)
Suppose that M D .S;  / is a weighted matroid with weight function w and that S
is sorted into monotonically decreasing order by weight. Let x be the ﬁrst element
of S such that fxg is independent, if any such x exists. If x exists, then there exists
an optimal subset A of S that contains x.

Proof If no such x exists, then the only independent subset is the empty set and
the lemma is vacuously true. Otherwise, let B be any nonempty optimal subset.
Assume that x … B; otherwise, letting A D B gives an optimal subset of S that
contains x.
   No element of B has weight greater than w.x/. To see why, observe that y 2 B
implies that fyg is independent, since B 2  and  is hereditary. Our choice of x
therefore ensures that w.x/  w.y/ for any y 2 B.
   Construct the set A as follows. Begin with A D fxg. By the choice of x, set A is
independent. Using the exchange property, repeatedly ﬁnd a new element of B that
we can add to A until jAj D jBj, while preserving the independence of A. At that
point, A and B are the same except that A has x and B has some other element y.
That is, A D B  fyg [ fxg for some y 2 B, and so
w.A/ D w.B/  w.y/ C w.x/
      w.B/ :
Because set B is optimal, set A, which contains x, must also be optimal.

  We next show that if an element is not an option initially, then it cannot be an
option later.

Lemma 16.8
Let M D .S;  / be any matroid. If x is an element of S that is an extension of
some independent subset A of S, then x is also an extension of ;.

Proof Since x is an extension of A, we have that A [ fxg is independent. Since 
is hereditary, fxg must be independent. Thus, x is an extension of ;.

Corollary 16.9
Let M D .S;  / be any matroid. If x is an element of S such that x is not an
extension of ;, then x is not an extension of any independent subset A of S.

Proof   This corollary is simply the contrapositive of Lemma 16.8.
