732        Chapter 26 Maximum Flow




26.3 Maximum bipartite matching

           Some combinatorial problems can easily be cast as maximum-ﬂow problems. The
           multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-ﬂow problem from Section 26.1 gave us
           one example. Some other combinatorial problems seem on the surface to have little
           to do with ﬂow networks, but can in fact be reduced to maximum-ﬂow problems.
           This section presents one such problem: ﬁnding a maximum matching in a bipartite
           graph. In order to solve this problem, we shall take advantage of an integrality
           property provided by the Ford-Fulkerson method. We shall also see how to use
           the Ford-Fulkerson method to solve the maximum-bipartite-matching problem on
           a graph G D .V; E/ in O.VE/ time.

           The maximum-bipartite-matching problem
           Given an undirected graph G D .V; E/, a matching is a subset of edges M  E
           such that for all vertices  2 V , at most one edge of M is incident on . We
           say that a vertex  2 V is matched by the matching M if some edge in M is
           incident on ; otherwise,  is unmatched. A maximum matching is a matching
           of maximum cardinality, that is, a matching M such that for any matching M 0 ,
           we have jM j  jM 0 j. In this section, we shall restrict our attention to ﬁnding
           maximum matchings in bipartite graphs: graphs in which the vertex set can be
           partitioned into V D L [ R, where L and R are disjoint and all edges in E
           go between L and R. We further assume that every vertex in V has at least one
           incident edge. Figure 26.8 illustrates the notion of a matching in a bipartite graph.
              The problem of ﬁnding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph has many
           practical applications. As an example, we might consider matching a set L of ma-
           chines with a set R of tasks to be performed simultaneously. We take the presence
           of edge .u; / in E to mean that a particular machine u 2 L is capable of per-
           forming a particular task  2 R. A maximum matching provides work for as many
           machines as possible.

           Finding a maximum bipartite matching
           We can use the Ford-Fulkerson method to ﬁnd a maximum matching in an undi-
           rected bipartite graph G D .V; E/ in time polynomial in jV j and jEj. The trick is
           to construct a ﬂow network in which ﬂows correspond to matchings, as shown in
           Figure 26.8(c). We deﬁne the corresponding ﬂow network G 0 D .V 0 ; E 0 / for the
           bipartite graph G as follows. We let the source s and sink t be new vertices not
           in V , and we let V 0 D V [ fs; tg. If the vertex partition of G is V D L [ R, the
