250   Chapter 10 Elementary Data Structures


      10-2 Mergeable heaps using linked lists
      A mergeable heap supports the following operations: M AKE -H EAP (which creates
      an empty mergeable heap), I NSERT, M INIMUM, E XTRACT-M IN, and U NION.1
      Show how to implement mergeable heaps using linked lists in each of the following
      cases. Try to make each operation as efﬁcient as possible. Analyze the running
      time of each operation in terms of the size of the dynamic set(s) being operated on.
      a. Lists are sorted.

      b. Lists are unsorted.

      c. Lists are unsorted, and dynamic sets to be merged are disjoint.

      10-3 Searching a sorted compact list
      Exercise 10.3-4 asked how we might maintain an n-element list compactly in the
      ﬁrst n positions of an array. We shall assume that all keys are distinct and that the
      compact list is also sorted, that is, keyŒi < keyŒnextŒi for all i D 1; 2; : : : ; n such
      that nextŒi ¤ NIL . We will also assume that we have a variable L that contains
      the index of the ﬁrst element on the list. Under these assumptions, you will show       p
      that we can use the following randomized algorithm to search the list in O. n/
      expected time.

      C OMPACT-L IST-S EARCH .L; n; k/
       1 i DL
       2 while i ¤ NIL and keyŒi < k
       3      j D R ANDOM.1; n/
       4      if keyŒi < keyŒj  and keyŒj   k
       5           i Dj
       6           if keyŒi == k
       7                return i
       8      i D nextŒi
       9 if i == NIL or keyŒi > k
      10      return NIL
      11 else return i

        If we ignore lines 3–7 of the procedure, we have an ordinary algorithm for
      searching a sorted linked list, in which index i points to each position of the list in


      1 Because we have deﬁned a mergeable heap to support M INIMUM and E XTRACT-M IN , we can also

      refer to it as a mergeable min-heap. Alternatively, if it supported M AXIMUM and E XTRACT-M AX,
      it would be a mergeable max-heap.
