33.3 Finding the convex hull                                                                    1037



                      left chain   right chain


                                   p3




        p4                                                                      p2




                                                                        p1

                           p0

             left chain     right chain


Figure 33.9 The operation of Jarvis’s march. We choose the ﬁrst vertex as the lowest point p0 .
The next vertex, p1 , has the smallest polar angle of any point with respect to p0 . Then, p2 has the
smallest polar angle with respect to p1 . The right chain goes as high as the highest point p3 . Then,
we construct the left chain by ﬁnding smallest polar angles with respect to the negative x-axis.


Jarvis’s march
Jarvis’s march computes the convex hull of a set Q of points by a technique known
as package wrapping (or gift wrapping). The algorithm runs in time O.nh/,
where h is the number of vertices of CH.Q/. When h is o.lg n/, Jarvis’s march is
asymptotically faster than Graham’s scan.
   Intuitively, Jarvis’s march simulates wrapping a taut piece of paper around the
set Q. We start by taping the end of the paper to the lowest point in the set, that is,
to the same point p0 with which we start Graham’s scan. We know that this point
must be a vertex of the convex hull. We pull the paper to the right to make it taut,
and then we pull it higher until it touches a point. This point must also be a vertex
of the convex hull. Keeping the paper taut, we continue in this way around the set
of vertices until we come back to our original point p0 .
   More formally, Jarvis’s march builds a sequence H D hp0 ; p1 ; : : : ; ph1 i of the
vertices of CH.Q/. We start with p0 . As Figure 33.9 shows, the next vertex p1
in the convex hull has the smallest polar angle with respect to p0 . (In case of ties,
we choose the point farthest from p0 .) Similarly, p2 has the smallest polar angle
