           Notes for Chapter 20                                                                  559


               We cluster the n elements into n= lg u groups of size lg u. (Assume for now
                that lg u divides n.) The ﬁrst group consists of the lg u smallest elements in the
                set, the second group consists of the next lg u smallest elements, and so on.
               We designate a “representative” value for each group. The representative of
                the ith group is at least as large as the largest element in the ith group, and it is
                smaller than every element of the .i C1/st group. (The representative of the last
                group can be the maximum possible element u  1.) Note that a representative
                might be a value not currently in the set.
               We store the lg u elements of each group in a balanced binary search tree, such
                as a red-black tree. Each representative points to the balanced binary search
                tree for its group, and each balanced binary search tree points to its group’s
                representative.
               The perfect hash table stores only the representatives, which are also stored in
                a doubly linked list in increasing order.
           We call this structure a y-fast trie.

           c. Show that a y-fast trie requires only O.n/ space to store n elements.

           d. Show how to perform the M INIMUM and M AXIMUM operations in O.lg lg u/
              time with a y-fast trie.

           e. Show how to perform the M EMBER operation in O.lg lg u/ time.

           f. Show how to perform the P REDECESSOR and S UCCESSOR operations in
              O.lg lg u/ time.

           g. Explain why the I NSERT and D ELETE operations take .lg lg u/ time.

           h. Show how to relax the requirement that each group in a y-fast trie has exactly
              lg u elements to allow I NSERT and D ELETE to run in O.lg lg u/ amortized time
              without affecting the asymptotic running times of the other operations.


Chapter notes

           The data structure in this chapter is named after P. van Emde Boas, who described
           an early form of the idea in 1975 [339]. Later papers by van Emde Boas [340]
           and van Emde Boas, Kaas, and Zijlstra [341] reﬁned the idea and the exposition.
           Mehlhorn and Näher [252] subsequently extended the ideas to apply to universe
