1052   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


                                                                                       yes
       instance α           polynomial-time      instance β       polynomial-time                   yes
          of A            reduction algorithm       of B       algorithm to decide B   no           no
                                    polynomial-time algorithm to decide A



       Figure 34.1 How to use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm to solve a decision problem A in
       polynomial time, given a polynomial-time decision algorithm for another problem B. In polynomial
       time, we transform an instance ˛ of A into an instance ˇ of B, we solve B in polynomial time, and
       we use the answer for ˇ as the answer for ˛.


       We call such a procedure a polynomial-time reduction algorithm and, as Fig-
       ure 34.1 shows, it provides us a way to solve problem A in polynomial time:
       1. Given an instance ˛ of problem A, use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm
          to transform it to an instance ˇ of problem B.
       2. Run the polynomial-time decision algorithm for B on the instance ˇ.
       3. Use the answer for ˇ as the answer for ˛.
       As long as each of these steps takes polynomial time, all three together do also, and
       so we have a way to decide on ˛ in polynomial time. In other words, by “reducing”
       solving problem A to solving problem B, we use the “easiness” of B to prove the
       “easiness” of A.
          Recalling that NP-completeness is about showing how hard a problem is rather
       than how easy it is, we use polynomial-time reductions in the opposite way to show
       that a problem is NP-complete. Let us take the idea a step further, and show how we
       could use polynomial-time reductions to show that no polynomial-time algorithm
       can exist for a particular problem B. Suppose we have a decision problem A for
       which we already know that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist. (Let us not
       concern ourselves for now with how to ﬁnd such a problem A.) Suppose further
       that we have a polynomial-time reduction transforming instances of A to instances
       of B. Now we can use a simple proof by contradiction to show that no polynomial-
       time algorithm can exist for B. Suppose otherwise; i.e., suppose that B has a
       polynomial-time algorithm. Then, using the method shown in Figure 34.1, we
       would have a way to solve problem A in polynomial time, which contradicts our
       assumption that there is no polynomial-time algorithm for A.
          For NP-completeness, we cannot assume that there is absolutely no polynomial-
       time algorithm for problem A. The proof methodology is similar, however, in that
       we prove that problem B is NP-complete on the assumption that problem A is also
       NP-complete.
