1108       Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms


           Chapter outline
           The ﬁrst four sections of this chapter present some examples of polynomial-time
           approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems, and the ﬁfth section presents
           a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme. Section 35.1 begins with a study
           of the vertex-cover problem, an NP-complete minimization problem that has an
           approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of 2. Section 35.2 presents
           an approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of 2 for the case of the
           traveling-salesman problem in which the cost function satisﬁes the triangle in-
           equality. It also shows that without the triangle inequality, for any constant   1,
           a -approximation algorithm cannot exist unless P D NP. In Section 35.3, we
           show how to use a greedy method as an effective approximation algorithm for the
           set-covering problem, obtaining a covering whose cost is at worst a logarithmic
           factor larger than the optimal cost. Section 35.4 presents two more approximation
           algorithms. First we study the optimization version of 3-CNF satisﬁability and
           give a simple randomized algorithm that produces a solution with an expected ap-
           proximation ratio of 8=7. Then we examine a weighted variant of the vertex-cover
           problem and show how to use linear programming to develop a 2-approximation
           algorithm. Finally, Section 35.5 presents a fully polynomial-time approximation
           scheme for the subset-sum problem.


35.1 The vertex-cover problem

           Section 34.5.2 deﬁned the vertex-cover problem and proved it NP-complete. Recall
           that a vertex cover of an undirected graph G D .V; E/ is a subset V 0  V such
           that if .u; / is an edge of G, then either u 2 V 0 or  2 V 0 (or both). The size of a
           vertex cover is the number of vertices in it.
              The vertex-cover problem is to ﬁnd a vertex cover of minimum size in a given
           undirected graph. We call such a vertex cover an optimal vertex cover. This prob-
           lem is the optimization version of an NP-complete decision problem.
              Even though we don’t know how to ﬁnd an optimal vertex cover in a graph G
           in polynomial time, we can efﬁciently ﬁnd a vertex cover that is near-optimal.
           The following approximation algorithm takes as input an undirected graph G and
           returns a vertex cover whose size is guaranteed to be no more than twice the size
           of an optimal vertex cover.
