           35.2 The traveling-salesman problem                                          1111


           is, as we argued in the proof of Theorem 35.1, a lower bound on the size of an
           optimal vertex cover. The algorithm returns a vertex cover whose size is at most
           twice the size of the maximal matching A. By relating the size of the solution
           returned to the lower bound, we obtain our approximation ratio. We will use this
           methodology in later sections as well.

           Exercises

           35.1-1
           Give an example of a graph for which A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER always yields a
           suboptimal solution.

           35.1-2
           Prove that the set of edges picked in line 4 of A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER forms a
           maximal matching in the graph G.

           35.1-3 ?
           Professor Bündchen proposes the following heuristic to solve the vertex-cover
           problem. Repeatedly select a vertex of highest degree, and remove all of its in-
           cident edges. Give an example to show that the professor’s heuristic does not have
           an approximation ratio of 2. (Hint: Try a bipartite graph with vertices of uniform
           degree on the left and vertices of varying degree on the right.)

           35.1-4
           Give an efﬁcient greedy algorithm that ﬁnds an optimal vertex cover for a tree in
           linear time.

           35.1-5
           From the proof of Theorem 34.12, we know that the vertex-cover problem and the
           NP-complete clique problem are complementary in the sense that an optimal vertex
           cover is the complement of a maximum-size clique in the complement graph. Does
           this relationship imply that there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm
           with a constant approximation ratio for the clique problem? Justify your answer.


35.2 The traveling-salesman problem

           In the traveling-salesman problem introduced in Section 34.5.4, we are given a
           complete undirected graph G D .V; E/ that has a nonnegative integer cost c.u; /
           associated with each edge .u; / 2 E, and we must ﬁnd a hamiltonian cycle (a
           tour) of G with minimum cost. As an extension of our notation, let c.A/ denote
           the total cost of the edges in the subset A  E:
