396   Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming


      Improving the code
      Once you have developed an algorithm, you will often ﬁnd that you can improve
      on the time or space it uses. Some changes can simplify the code and improve
      constant factors but otherwise yield no asymptotic improvement in performance.
      Others can yield substantial asymptotic savings in time and space.
         In the LCS algorithm, for example, we can eliminate the b table altogether. Each
      cŒi; j  entry depends on only three other c table entries: cŒi  1; j  1, cŒi  1; j ,
      and cŒi; j  1. Given the value of cŒi; j , we can determine in O.1/ time which of
      these three values was used to compute cŒi; j , without inspecting table b. Thus, we
      can reconstruct an LCS in O.mCn/ time using a procedure similar to P RINT-LCS.
      (Exercise 15.4-2 asks you to give the pseudocode.) Although we save ‚.mn/ space
      by this method, the auxiliary space requirement for computing an LCS does not
      asymptotically decrease, since we need ‚.mn/ space for the c table anyway.
         We can, however, reduce the asymptotic space requirements for LCS-L ENGTH,
      since it needs only two rows of table c at a time: the row being computed and the
      previous row. (In fact, as Exercise 15.4-4 asks you to show, we can use only slightly
      more than the space for one row of c to compute the length of an LCS.) This
      improvement works if we need only the length of an LCS; if we need to reconstruct
      the elements of an LCS, the smaller table does not keep enough information to
      retrace our steps in O.m C n/ time.

      Exercises

      15.4-1
      Determine an LCS of h1; 0; 0; 1; 0; 1; 0; 1i and h0; 1; 0; 1; 1; 0; 1; 1; 0i.

      15.4-2
      Give pseudocode to reconstruct an LCS from the completed c table and the original
      sequences X D hx1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xm i and Y D hy1 ; y2 ; : : : ; yn i in O.m C n/ time,
      without using the b table.

      15.4-3
      Give a memoized version of LCS-L ENGTH that runs in O.mn/ time.

      15.4-4
      Show how to compute the length of an LCS using only 2min.m; n/ entries in the c
      table plus O.1/ additional space. Then show how to do the same thing, but using
      min.m; n/ entries plus O.1/ additional space.
