670   Chapter 24 Single-Source Shortest Paths


      24.4-5
      Show how to modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm slightly so that when we use it
      to solve a system of difference constraints with m inequalities on n unknowns, the
      running time is O.nm/.

      24.4-6
      Suppose that in addition to a system of difference constraints, we want to handle
      equality constraints of the form xi D xj C bk . Show how to adapt the Bellman-
      Ford algorithm to solve this variety of constraint system.

      24.4-7
      Show how to solve a system of difference constraints by a Bellman-Ford-like algo-
      rithm that runs on a constraint graph without the extra vertex 0 .

      24.4-8 ?
      Let Ax  b be a system of m difference constraints in n unknowns. Show that the
      Bellman-Ford
            Pn     algorithm, when run on the corresponding constraint graph, maxi-
      mizes i D1 xi subject to Ax  b and xi  0 for all xi .

      24.4-9 ?
      Show that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the constraint graph for a sys-
      tem Ax  b of difference constraints, minimizes the quantity .max fxi gmin fxi g/
      subject to Ax  b. Explain how this fact might come in handy if the algorithm is
      used to schedule construction jobs.

      24.4-10
      Suppose that every row in the matrix A of a linear program Ax  b corresponds to
      a difference constraint, a single-variable constraint of the form xi  bk , or a single-
      variable constraint of the form xi  bk . Show how to adapt the Bellman-Ford
      algorithm to solve this variety of constraint system.

      24.4-11
      Give an efﬁcient algorithm to solve a system Ax  b of difference constraints
      when all of the elements of b are real-valued and all of the unknowns xi must be
      integers.

      24.4-12 ?
      Give an efﬁcient algorithm to solve a system Ax  b of difference constraints
      when all of the elements of b are real-valued and a speciﬁed subset of some, but
      not necessarily all, of the unknowns xi must be integers.
