120   Chapter 5 Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms

                        " n           #
                         X
      E ŒX  D E                 Xi
                          i D1
                   X
                   n
              D           E ŒXi 
                   i D1
                   X
                   n
              D           1=2
                   i D1
              D n=2 :
      Thus, compared to the method used in equation (C.37), indicator random variables
      greatly simplify the calculation. We shall use indicator random variables through-
      out this book.

      Analysis of the hiring problem using indicator random variables
      Returning to the hiring problem, we now wish to compute the expected number of
      times that we hire a new ofﬁce assistant. In order to use a probabilistic analysis, we
      assume that the candidates arrive in a random order, as discussed in the previous
      section. (We shall see in Section 5.3 how to remove this assumption.) Let X be the
      random variable whose value equals the number of times we hire a new ofﬁce as-
      sistant. We could then apply the deﬁnition of expected value from equation (C.20)
      to obtain
                 X
                 n
      E ŒX  D         x Pr fX D xg ;
                 xD1

      but this calculation would be cumbersome. We shall instead use indicator random
      variables to greatly simplify the calculation.
        To use indicator random variables, instead of computing E ŒX  by deﬁning one
      variable associated with the number of times we hire a new ofﬁce assistant, we
      deﬁne n variables related to whether or not each particular candidate is hired. In
      particular, we let Xi be the indicator random variable associated with the event in
      which the ith candidate is hired. Thus,
      Xi    D I fcandidate i is hiredg
              (
                 1 if candidate i is hired ;
            D
                 0 if candidate i is not hired ;

      and
      X D X1 C X2 C    C Xn :                                                      (5.2)
