          10.2 Linked lists                                                                                        237


                                        prev    key     next

(a)   L:head                  9                  16                   4                   1


(b)   L:head                 25                   9                  16                   4                    1


(c)   L:head                 25                   9                  16                   1



          Figure 10.3 (a) A doubly linked list L representing the dynamic set f1; 4; 9; 16g. Each element in
          the list is an object with attributes for the key and pointers (shown by arrows) to the next and previous
          objects. The next attribute of the tail and the pre attribute of the head are NIL , indicated by a diagonal
          slash. The attribute L: head points to the head. (b) Following the execution of L IST-I NSERT.L; x/,
          where x: key D 25, the linked list has a new object with key 25 as the new head. This new object
          points to the old head with key 9. (c) The result of the subsequent call L IST-D ELETE.L; x/, where x
          points to the object with key 4.


          elements. In the remainder of this section, we assume that the lists with which we
          are working are unsorted and doubly linked.

          Searching a linked list
          The procedure L IST-S EARCH .L; k/ ﬁnds the ﬁrst element with key k in list L
          by a simple linear search, returning a pointer to this element. If no object with
          key k appears in the list, then the procedure returns NIL. For the linked list in
          Figure 10.3(a), the call L IST-S EARCH .L; 4/ returns a pointer to the third element,
          and the call L IST-S EARCH .L; 7/ returns NIL.

          L IST-S EARCH .L; k/
          1 x D L:head
          2 while x ¤ NIL and x:key ¤ k
          3        x D x:next
          4 return x

          To search a list of n objects, the L IST-S EARCH procedure takes ‚.n/ time in the
          worst case, since it may have to search the entire list.

          Inserting into a linked list
          Given an element x whose key attribute has already been set, the L IST-I NSERT
          procedure “splices” x onto the front of the linked list, as shown in Figure 10.3(b).
