762   Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


      subareas. Each expert can work on multiple jobs simultaneously. If the company
      chooses to accept job Ji , it must have hired experts in all subareas in Ri , and it will
      take in revenue of pi dollars.
         Professor Gore’s job is to determine which subareas to hire experts in and which
      jobs to accept in order to maximize the net revenue, which is the total income from
      jobs accepted minus the total cost of employing the experts.
         Consider the following ﬂow network G. It contains a source vertex s, vertices
      A1 ; A2 ; : : : ; An , vertices J1 ; J2 ; : : : ; Jm , and a sink vertex t. For k D 1; 2 : : : ; n,
      the ﬂow network contains an edge .s; Ak / with capacity c.s; Ak / D ck , and
      for i D 1; 2; : : : ; m, the ﬂow network contains an edge .Ji ; t/ with capacity
      c.Ji ; t/ D pi . For k D 1; 2; : : : ; n and i D 1; 2; : : : ; m, if Ak 2 Ri , then G
      contains an edge .Ak ; Ji / with capacity c.Ak ; Ji / D 1.

      a. Show that if Ji 2 T for a ﬁnite-capacity cut .S; T / of G, then Ak 2 T for each
         A k 2 Ri .

      b. Show how to determine the maximum net revenue from the capacity of a mini-
         mum cut of G and the given pi values.

      c. Give an efﬁcient algorithm to determine which jobs to accept and which experts
              Pm Analyze the running time of your algorithm in terms of m, n, and
         to hire.
         r D i D1 jRi j.

      26-4 Updating maximum ﬂow
      Let G D .V; E/ be a ﬂow network with source s, sink t, and integer capacities.
      Suppose that we are given a maximum ﬂow in G.

      a. Suppose that we increase the capacity of a single edge .u; / 2 E by 1. Give
         an O.V C E/-time algorithm to update the maximum ﬂow.

      b. Suppose that we decrease the capacity of a single edge .u; / 2 E by 1. Give
         an O.V C E/-time algorithm to update the maximum ﬂow.

      26-5 Maximum ﬂow by scaling
      Let G D .V; E/ be a ﬂow network with source s, sink t, and an integer capac-
      ity c.u; / on each edge .u; / 2 E. Let C D max.u;/2E c.u; /.

      a. Argue that a minimum cut of G has capacity at most C jEj.

      b. For a given number K, show how to ﬁnd an augmenting path of capacity at
         least K in O.E/ time, if such a path exists.
