900        Chapter 30 Polynomials and the FFT


           Note that degree.C / D degree.A/ C degree.B/, implying that if A is a polyno-
           mial of degree-bound na and B is a polynomial of degree-bound nb , then C is a
           polynomial of degree-bound na C nb  1. Since a polynomial of degree-bound k
           is also a polynomial of degree-bound k C 1, we will normally say that the product
           polynomial C is a polynomial of degree-bound na C nb .

           Chapter outline
           Section 30.1 presents two ways to represent polynomials: the coefﬁcient represen-
           tation and the point-value representation. The straightforward methods for multi-
           plying polynomials—equations (30.1) and (30.2)—take ‚.n2 / time when we rep-
           resent polynomials in coefﬁcient form, but only ‚.n/ time when we represent them
           in point-value form. We can, however, multiply polynomials using the coefﬁcient
           representation in only ‚.n lg n/ time by converting between the two representa-
           tions. To see why this approach works, we must ﬁrst study complex roots of unity,
           which we do in Section 30.2. Then, we use the FFT and its inverse, also described
           in Section 30.2, to perform the conversions. Section 30.3 shows how to implement
           the FFT quickly in both serial and parallel models.
              This chapter uses complex numbers
                                              p extensively, and within this chapter we use
           the symbol i exclusively to denote 1.


30.1 Representing polynomials

           The coefﬁcient and point-value representations of polynomials are in a sense equiv-
           alent; that is, a polynomial in point-value form has a unique counterpart in co-
           efﬁcient form. In this section, we introduce the two representations and show
           how to combine them so that we can multiply two degree-bound n polynomials
           in ‚.n lg n/ time.

           Coefﬁcient representation
                                                                         Pn1          j
           A coefﬁcient representation of a polynomial A.x/ D                j D0 aj x   of degree-
           bound n is a vector of coefﬁcients a D .a0 ; a1 ; : : : ; an1 /. In matrix equations
           in this chapter, we shall generally treat vectors as column vectors.
              The coefﬁcient representation is convenient for certain operations on polyno-
           mials. For example, the operation of evaluating the polynomial A.x/ at a given
           point x0 consists of computing the value of A.x0 /. We can evaluate a polynomial
           in ‚.n/ time using Horner’s rule:
           A.x0 / D a0 C x0 .a1 C x0 .a2 C    C x0 .an2 C x0 .an1 //   // :
