          16.4 Matroids and greedy methods                                                  437


          16.3-9
          Show that no compression scheme can expect to compress a ﬁle of randomly cho-
          sen 8-bit characters by even a single bit. (Hint: Compare the number of possible
          ﬁles with the number of possible encoded ﬁles.)



? 16.4 Matroids and greedy methods

          In this section, we sketch a beautiful theory about greedy algorithms. This theory
          describes many situations in which the greedy method yields optimal solutions. It
          involves combinatorial structures known as “matroids.” Although this theory does
          not cover all cases for which a greedy method applies (for example, it does not
          cover the activity-selection problem of Section 16.1 or the Huffman-coding prob-
          lem of Section 16.3), it does cover many cases of practical interest. Furthermore,
          this theory has been extended to cover many applications; see the notes at the end
          of this chapter for references.

          Matroids
          A matroid is an ordered pair M D .S;  / satisfying the following conditions.
          1. S is a ﬁnite set.
          2.  is a nonempty family of subsets of S, called the independent subsets of S,
             such that if B 2  and A  B, then A 2  . We say that  is hereditary if it
             satisﬁes this property. Note that the empty set ; is necessarily a member of  .
          3. If A 2  , B 2  , and jAj < jBj, then there exists some element x 2 B  A
             such that A [ fxg 2  . We say that M satisﬁes the exchange property.
             The word “matroid” is due to Hassler Whitney. He was studying matric ma-
          troids, in which the elements of S are the rows of a given matrix and a set of rows is
          independent if they are linearly independent in the usual sense. As Exercise 16.4-2
          asks you to show, this structure deﬁnes a matroid.
             As another example of matroids, consider the graphic matroid MG D .SG ;  G /
          deﬁned in terms of a given undirected graph G D .V; E/ as follows:
             The set SG is deﬁned to be E, the set of edges of G.
             If A is a subset of E, then A 2  G if and only if A is acyclic. That is, a set of
              edges A is independent if and only if the subgraph GA D .V; A/ forms a forest.
          The graphic matroid MG is closely related to the minimum-spanning-tree problem,
          which Chapter 23 covers in detail.
