Preface




          Before there were computers, there were algorithms. But now that there are com-
          puters, there are even more algorithms, and algorithms lie at the heart of computing.
             This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of com-
          puter algorithms. It presents many algorithms and covers them in considerable
          depth, yet makes their design and analysis accessible to all levels of readers. We
          have tried to keep explanations elementary without sacriﬁcing depth of coverage
          or mathematical rigor.
             Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application area, or a
          related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a pseudocode designed to
          be readable by anyone who has done a little programming. The book contains 244
          ﬁgures—many with multiple parts—illustrating how the algorithms work. Since
          we emphasize efﬁciency as a design criterion, we include careful analyses of the
          running times of all our algorithms.
             The text is intended primarily for use in undergraduate or graduate courses in
          algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses engineering issues in algorithm
          design, as well as mathematical aspects, it is equally well suited for self-study by
          technical professionals.
             In this, the third edition, we have once again updated the entire book. The
          changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters, revised pseudocode, and
          a more active writing style.

          To the teacher
          We have designed this book to be both versatile and complete. You should ﬁnd it
          useful for a variety of courses, from an undergraduate course in data structures up
          through a graduate course in algorithms. Because we have provided considerably
          more material than can ﬁt in a typical one-term course, you can consider this book
          to be a “buffet” or “smorgasbord” from which you can pick and choose the material
          that best supports the course you wish to teach.
