1044       Chapter 33 Computational Geometry


           33.4-3
           We can deﬁne the distance between two points in ways other than euclidean. In
           the plane, the Lm -distance between points p1 and p2 is given by the expres-
                                            1=m
           sion .jx1  x2 jm C jy1  y2 jm / . Euclidean distance, therefore, is L2 -distance.
           Modify the closest-pair algorithm to use the L1 -distance, which is also known as
           the Manhattan distance.

           33.4-4
           Given two points p1 and p2 in the plane, the L1 -distance between them is
           given by max.jx1  x2 j ; jy1  y2 j/. Modify the closest-pair algorithm to use the
           L1 -distance.

           33.4-5
           Suppose that .n/ of the points given to the closest-pair algorithm are covertical.
           Show how to determine the sets PL and PR and how to determine whether each
           point of Y is in PL or PR so that the running time for the closest-pair algorithm
           remains O.n lg n/.

           33.4-6
           Suggest a change to the closest-pair algorithm that avoids presorting the Y array
           but leaves the running time as O.n lg n/. (Hint: Merge sorted arrays YL and YR to
           form the sorted array Y .)



Problems

           33-1 Convex layers
           Given a set Q of points in the plane, we deﬁne the convex layers of Q inductively.
           The ﬁrst convex layer of Q consists of those points in Q that are vertices of CH.Q/.
           For i > 1, deﬁne Qi to consist of the points of Q with all points in convex layers
           1; 2; : : : ; i  1 removed. Then, the ith convex layer of Q is CH.Qi / if Qi ¤ ; and
           is undeﬁned otherwise.

           a. Give an O.n2 /-time algorithm to ﬁnd the convex layers of a set of n points.

           b. Prove that .n lg n/ time is required to compute the convex layers of a set of n
              points with any model of computation that requires .n lg n/ time to sort n real
              numbers.
