664         Chapter 24 Single-Source Shortest Paths


            the order in which the breadth-ﬁrst search of G 0 colors vertices in V black is the
            same as the order in which Dijkstra’s algorithm extracts the vertices of V from the
            priority queue when it runs on G.

            24.3-8
            Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with nonnegative weight function
            w W E ! f0; 1; : : : ; W g for some nonnegative integer W . Modify Dijkstra’s algo-
            rithm to compute the shortest paths from a given source vertex s in O.W V C E/
            time.

            24.3-9
            Modify your algorithm from Exercise 24.3-8 to run in O..V C E/ lg W / time.
            (Hint: How many distinct shortest-path estimates can there be in V  S at any
            point in time?)

            24.3-10
            Suppose that we are given a weighted, directed graph G D .V; E/ in which edges
            that leave the source vertex s may have negative weights, all other edge weights
            are nonnegative, and there are no negative-weight cycles. Argue that Dijkstra’s
            algorithm correctly ﬁnds shortest paths from s in this graph.



24.4 Difference constraints and shortest paths

            Chapter 29 studies the general linear-programming problem, in which we wish to
            optimize a linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities. In this section, we
            investigate a special case of linear programming that we reduce to ﬁnding shortest
            paths from a single source. We can then solve the single-source shortest-paths
            problem that results by running the Bellman-Ford algorithm, thereby also solving
            the linear-programming problem.

            Linear programming
            In the general linear-programming problem, we are given an m n matrix A,
            an m-vector b, and an n-vector c.P   We wish to ﬁnd a vector x of n elements that
                                                  n
            maximizes the objective function i D1 ci xi subject to the m constraints given by
            Ax  b.
               Although the simplex algorithm, which is the focus of Chapter 29, does not
            always run in time polynomial in the size of its input, there are other linear-
            programming algorithms that do run in polynomial time. We offer here two reasons
            to understand the setup of linear-programming problems. First, if we know that we
