754   Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


         To prove the second statement, according to the test in line 1 and Lemma 26.28,
      we need only show that all edges leaving u are inadmissible. If a call to
      D ISCHARGE .u/ starts with the pointer u:current at the head of u’s neighbor list
      and ﬁnishes with it off the end of the list, then all of u’s outgoing edges are in-
      admissible and a relabel operation applies. It is possible, however, that during a
      call to D ISCHARGE .u/, the pointer u:current traverses only part of the list be-
      fore the procedure returns. Calls to D ISCHARGE on other vertices may then oc-
      cur, but u:current will continue moving through the list during the next call to
      D ISCHARGE .u/. We now consider what happens during a complete pass through
      the list, which begins at the head of u:N and ﬁnishes with u:current D NIL. Once
      u:current reaches the end of the list, the procedure relabels u and begins a new
      pass. For the u:current pointer to advance past a vertex  2 u:N during a pass, the
      edge .u; / must be deemed inadmissible by the test in line 6. Thus, by the time
      the pass completes, every edge leaving u has been determined to be inadmissible
      at some time during the pass. The key observation is that at the end of the pass,
      every edge leaving u is still inadmissible. Why? By Lemma 26.27, pushes cannot
      create any admissible edges, regardless of which vertex the ﬂow is pushed from.
      Thus, any admissible edge must be created by a relabel operation. But the vertex u
      is not relabeled during the pass, and by Lemma 26.28, any other vertex  that is
      relabeled during the pass (resulting from a call of D ISCHARGE ./) has no entering
      admissible edges after relabeling. Thus, at the end of the pass, all edges leaving u
      remain inadmissible, which completes the proof.

      The relabel-to-front algorithm
      In the relabel-to-front algorithm, we maintain a linked list L consisting of all ver-
      tices in V  fs; tg. A key property is that the vertices in L are topologically sorted
      according to the admissible network, as we shall see in the loop invariant that fol-
      lows. (Recall from Lemma 26.26 that the admissible network is a dag.)
         The pseudocode for the relabel-to-front algorithm assumes that the neighbor
      lists u:N have already been created for each vertex u. It also assumes that u:next
      points to the vertex that follows u in list L and that, as usual, u:next D NIL if u is
      the last vertex in the list.
