994   Chapter 32 String Matching


      and T D an , then verifying takes time ‚..nmC1/m/, since each of the nmC1
      possible shifts is valid.
         In many applications, we expect few valid shifts—perhaps some constant c of
      them. In such applications, the expected matching time of the algorithm is only
      O..n  m C 1/ C cm/ D O.n C m/, plus the time required to process spurious
      hits. We can base a heuristic analysis on the assumption that reducing values mod-
      ulo q acts like a random mapping from † to Zq . (See the discussion on the use of
      division for hashing in Section 11.3.1. It is difﬁcult to formalize and prove such an
      assumption, although one viable approach is to assume that q is chosen randomly
      from integers of the appropriate size. We shall not pursue this formalization here.)
      We can then expect that the number of spurious hits is O.n=q/, since we can es-
      timate the chance that an arbitrary ts will be equivalent to p, modulo q, as 1=q.
      Since there are O.n/ positions at which the test of line 10 fails and we spend O.m/
      time for each hit, the expected matching time taken by the Rabin-Karp algorithm
      is
      O.n/ C O.m. C n=q// ;
      where  is the number of valid shifts. This running time is O.n/ if  D O.1/ and
      we choose q  m. That is, if the expected number of valid shifts is small (O.1/)
      and we choose the prime q to be larger than the length of the pattern, then we
      can expect the Rabin-Karp procedure to use only O.n C m/ matching time. Since
      m  n, this expected matching time is O.n/.

      Exercises

      32.2-1
      Working modulo q D 11, how many spurious hits does the Rabin-Karp matcher en-
      counter in the text T D 3141592653589793 when looking for the pattern P D 26?

      32.2-2
      How would you extend the Rabin-Karp method to the problem of searching a text
      string for an occurrence of any one of a given set of k patterns? Start by assuming
      that all k patterns have the same length. Then generalize your solution to allow the
      patterns to have different lengths.

      32.2-3
      Show how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to handle the problem of looking for
      a given m m pattern in an n n array of characters. (The pattern may be shifted
      vertically and horizontally, but it may not be rotated.)
