11.5 Perfect hashing                                                                 279


hashing to slot j are re-hashed into a secondary hash table Sj of size mj using a
hash function hj chosen from the class Hp;mj .1
   We shall proceed in two steps. First, we shall determine how to ensure that
the secondary tables have no collisions. Second, we shall show that the expected
amount of memory used overall—for the primary hash table and all the secondary
hash tables—is O.n/.

Theorem 11.9
Suppose that we store n keys in a hash table of size m D n2 using a hash function h
randomly chosen from a universal class of hash functions. Then, the probability is
less than 1=2 that there are any collisions.

Proof There are n2 pairs of keys that may collide; each pair collides with prob-
ability 1=m if h is chosen at random from a universal family H of hash functions.
Let X be a random variable that counts the number of collisions. When m D n2 ,
the expected number of collisions is
                !
              n      1
E ŒX  D           2
              2     n
          n2  n 1
        D        2
             2   n
        < 1=2 :
(This analysis is similar to the analysis of the birthday paradox in Section 5.4.1.)
Applying Markov’s inequality (C.30), Pr fX  tg  E ŒX  =t, with t D 1, com-
pletes the proof.

   In the situation described in Theorem 11.9, where m D n2 , it follows that a hash
function h chosen at random from H is more likely than not to have no collisions.
Given the set K of n keys to be hashed (remember that K is static), it is thus easy
to ﬁnd a collision-free hash function h with a few random trials.
   When n is large, however, a hash table of size m D n2 is excessive. Therefore,
we adopt the two-level hashing approach, and we use the approach of Theorem 11.9
only to hash the entries within each slot. We use an outer, or ﬁrst-level, hash
function h to hash the keys into m D n slots. Then, if nj keys hash to slot j , we
use a secondary hash table Sj of size mj D nj2 to provide collision-free constant-
time lookup.


1 When n D m D 1, we don’t really need a hash function for slot j ; when we choose a hash
         j       j
function hab .k/ D ..ak C b/ mod p/ mod mj for such a slot, we just use a D b D 0.
