720   Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


      The following lemma, whose proof we leave as Exercise 26.2-7, makes the above
      argument more precise.

      Lemma 26.2
      Let G D .V; E/ be a ﬂow network, let f be a ﬂow in G, and let p be an augmenting
      path in Gf . Deﬁne a function fp W V V ! R by
                   (
                     cf .p/ if .u; / is on p ;
      fp .u; / D                                                               (26.8)
                     0      otherwise :
      Then, fp is a ﬂow in Gf with value jfp j D cf .p/ > 0.


         The following corollary shows that if we augment f by fp , we get another ﬂow
      in G whose value is closer to the maximum. Figure 26.4(c) shows the result of
      augmenting the ﬂow f from Figure 26.4(a) by the ﬂow fp in Figure 26.4(b), and
      Figure 26.4(d) shows the ensuing residual network.

      Corollary 26.3
      Let G D .V; E/ be a ﬂow network, let f be a ﬂow in G, and let p be an
      augmenting path in Gf . Let fp be deﬁned as in equation (26.8), and suppose
      that we augment f by fp . Then the function f " fp is a ﬂow in G with value
      jf " fp j D jf j C jfp j > jf j.

      Proof   Immediate from Lemmas 26.1 and 26.2.

      Cuts of ﬂow networks
      The Ford-Fulkerson method repeatedly augments the ﬂow along augmenting paths
      until it has found a maximum ﬂow. How do we know that when the algorithm
      terminates, we have actually found a maximum ﬂow? The max-ﬂow min-cut theo-
      rem, which we shall prove shortly, tells us that a ﬂow is maximum if and only if its
      residual network contains no augmenting path. To prove this theorem, though, we
      must ﬁrst explore the notion of a cut of a ﬂow network.
         A cut .S; T / of ﬂow network G D .V; E/ is a partition of V into S and
      T D V  S such that s 2 S and t 2 T . (This deﬁnition is similar to the def-
      inition of “cut” that we used for minimum spanning trees in Chapter 23, except
      that here we are cutting a directed graph rather than an undirected graph, and we
      insist that s 2 S and t 2 T .) If f is a ﬂow, then the net ﬂow f .S; T / across the
      cut .S; T / is deﬁned to be
                   XX                XX
      f .S; T / D         f .u; /          f .; u/ :                            (26.9)
                  u2S 2T           u2S 2T
