1104       Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


            x



            y
                                                         TRUE



            z



           Figure 34.20   The widget corresponding to a clause .x _ y _ ´/, used in Problem 34-3.


           34-4 Scheduling with proﬁts and deadlines
           Suppose that we have one machine and a set of n tasks a1 ; a2 ; : : : ; an , each of
           which requires time on the machine. Each task aj requires tj time units on the
           machine (its processing time), yields a proﬁt of pj , and has a deadline dj . The
           machine can process only one task at a time, and task aj must run without inter-
           ruption for tj consecutive time units. If we complete task aj by its deadline dj , we
           receive a proﬁt pj , but if we complete it after its deadline, we receive no proﬁt. As
           an optimization problem, we are given the processing times, proﬁts, and deadlines
           for a set of n tasks, and we wish to ﬁnd a schedule that completes all the tasks and
           returns the greatest amount of proﬁt. The processing times, proﬁts, and deadlines
           are all nonnegative numbers.

           a. State this problem as a decision problem.

           b. Show that the decision problem is NP-complete.

           c. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the decision problem, assuming that all
              processing times are integers from 1 to n. (Hint: Use dynamic programming.)

           d. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem, assuming that
              all processing times are integers from 1 to n.


Chapter notes

           The book by Garey and Johnson [129] provides a wonderful guide to NP-complete-
           ness, discussing the theory at length and providing a catalogue of many problems
           that were known to be NP-complete in 1979. The proof of Theorem 34.13 is
           adapted from their book, and the list of NP-complete problem domains at the begin-
           ning of Section 34.5 is drawn from their table of contents. Johnson wrote a series
