1178           Appendix B        Sets, Etc.


                   3                                      3                                           3


           2                 7                    2            7                          2                       7


       4       1         5                    4       1              5               4          1           5


           6                                      6                                       6


                   (a)                                (b)                                            (c)


               Figure B.7 Binary trees. (a) A binary tree drawn in a standard way. The left child of a node is
               drawn beneath the node and to the left. The right child is drawn beneath and to the right. (b) A binary
               tree different from the one in (a). In (a), the left child of node 7 is 5 and the right child is absent.
               In (b), the left child of node 7 is absent and the right child is 5. As ordered trees, these trees are
               the same, but as binary trees, they are distinct. (c) The binary tree in (a) represented by the internal
               nodes of a full binary tree: an ordered tree in which each internal node has degree 2. The leaves in
               the tree are shown as squares.


                   is composed of three disjoint sets of nodes: a root node, a binary tree called its
                    left subtree, and a binary tree called its right subtree.
               The binary tree that contains no nodes is called the empty tree or null tree, some-
               times denoted NIL. If the left subtree is nonempty, its root is called the left child of
               the root of the entire tree. Likewise, the root of a nonnull right subtree is the right
               child of the root of the entire tree. If a subtree is the null tree NIL, we say that the
               child is absent or missing. Figure B.7(a) shows a binary tree.
                  A binary tree is not simply an ordered tree in which each node has degree at
               most 2. For example, in a binary tree, if a node has just one child, the position
               of the child—whether it is the left child or the right child—matters. In an or-
               dered tree, there is no distinguishing a sole child as being either left or right. Fig-
               ure B.7(b) shows a binary tree that differs from the tree in Figure B.7(a) because of
               the position of one node. Considered as ordered trees, however, the two trees are
               identical.
                  We can represent the positioning information in a binary tree by the internal
               nodes of an ordered tree, as shown in Figure B.7(c). The idea is to replace each
               missing child in the binary tree with a node having no children. These leaf nodes
               are drawn as squares in the ﬁgure. The tree that results is a full binary tree: each
               node is either a leaf or has degree exactly 2. There are no degree-1 nodes. Conse-
               quently, the order of the children of a node preserves the position information.
                  We can extend the positioning information that distinguishes binary trees from
               ordered trees to trees with more than 2 children per node. In a positional tree, the
