1046   Chapter 33 Computational Geometry


       b. Give an O.n2 lg n/-time algorithm to pair Ghostbusters with ghosts in such a
          way that no streams cross.

       33-4 Picking up sticks
       Professor Charon has a set of n sticks, which are piled up in some conﬁguration.
       Each stick is speciﬁed by its endpoints, and each endpoint is an ordered triple
       giving its .x; y; ´/ coordinates. No stick is vertical. He wishes to pick up all the
       sticks, one at a time, subject to the condition that he may pick up a stick only if
       there is no other stick on top of it.

       a. Give a procedure that takes two sticks a and b and reports whether a is above,
          below, or unrelated to b.

       b. Describe an efﬁcient algorithm that determines whether it is possible to pick up
          all the sticks, and if so, provides a legal order in which to pick them up.

       33-5 Sparse-hulled distributions
       Consider the problem of computing the convex hull of a set of points in the plane
       that have been drawn according to some known random distribution. Sometimes,
       the number of points, or size, of the convex hull of n points drawn from such a
       distribution has expectation O.n1 / for some constant  > 0. We call such a
       distribution sparse-hulled. Sparse-hulled distributions include the following:
          Points drawn uniformly from a unit-radius disk. The convex hull has expected
           size ‚.n1=3 /.
          Points drawn uniformly from the interior of a convex polygon with k sides, for
           any constant k. The convex hull has expected size ‚.lg n/.
          Points drawn according topa two-dimensional normal distribution. The convex
           hull has expected size ‚. lg n/.

       a. Given two convex polygons with n1 and n2 vertices respectively, show how to
          compute the convex hull of all n1 Cn2 points in O.n1 Cn2 / time. (The polygons
          may overlap.)

       b. Show how to compute the convex hull of a set of n points drawn independently
          according to a sparse-hulled distribution in O.n/ average-case time. (Hint:
          Recursively ﬁnd the convex hulls of the ﬁrst n=2 points and the second n=2
          points, and then combine the results.)
