1116   Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms


         Now, consider the traveling-salesman problem .G 0 ; c/. If the original graph G
       has a hamiltonian cycle H , then the cost function c assigns to each edge of H a
       cost of 1, and so .G 0 ; c/ contains a tour of cost jV j. On the other hand, if G does
       not contain a hamiltonian cycle, then any tour of G 0 must use some edge not in E.
       But any tour that uses an edge not in E has a cost of at least
       . jV j C 1/ C .jV j  1/ D  jV j C jV j
                                 >  jV j :
       Because edges not in G are so costly, there is a gap of at least  jV j between the cost
       of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G (cost jV j) and the cost of any other tour
       (cost at least  jV j C jV j). Therefore, the cost of a tour that is not a hamiltonian
       cycle in G is at least a factor of  C 1 greater than the cost of a tour that is a
       hamiltonian cycle in G.
          Now, suppose that we apply the approximation algorithm A to the traveling-
       salesman problem .G 0 ; c/. Because A is guaranteed to return a tour of cost no
       more than  times the cost of an optimal tour, if G contains a hamiltonian cycle,
       then A must return it. If G has no hamiltonian cycle, then A returns a tour of cost
       more than  jV j. Therefore, we can use A to solve the hamiltonian-cycle problem
       in polynomial time.

         The proof of Theorem 35.3 serves as an example of a general technique for
       proving that we cannot approximate a problem very well. Suppose that given an
       NP-hard problem X , we can produce in polynomial time a minimization prob-
       lem Y such that “yes” instances of X correspond to instances of Y with value at
       most k (for some k), but that “no” instances of X correspond to instances of Y
       with value greater than k. Then, we have shown that, unless P D NP, there is no
       polynomial-time -approximation algorithm for problem Y .

       Exercises

       35.2-1
       Suppose that a complete undirected graph G D .V; E/ with at least 3 vertices has
       a cost function c that satisﬁes the triangle inequality. Prove that c.u; /  0 for all
       u;  2 V .

       35.2-2
       Show how in polynomial time we can transform one instance of the traveling-
       salesman problem into another instance whose cost function satisﬁes the triangle
       inequality. The two instances must have the same set of optimal tours. Explain
       why such a polynomial-time transformation does not contradict Theorem 35.3, as-
       suming that P ¤ NP.
