Chapter 34   NP-Completeness                                                                1049


    we can ﬁnd the edges of the Euler tour in O.E/ time. A hamiltonian cycle of
    a directed graph G D .V; E/ is a simple cycle that contains each vertex in V .
    Determining whether a directed graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.
    (Later in this chapter, we shall prove that determining whether an undirected
    graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)
2-CNF satisﬁability vs. 3-CNF satisﬁability: A boolean formula contains vari-
   ables whose values are 0 or 1; boolean connectives such as ^ (AND), _ (OR),
   and : (NOT); and parentheses. A boolean formula is satisﬁable if there exists
   some assignment of the values 0 and 1 to its variables that causes it to evaluate
   to 1. We shall deﬁne terms more formally later in this chapter, but informally, a
   boolean formula is in k-conjunctive normal form, or k-CNF, if it is the AND
   of clauses of ORs of exactly k variables or their negations. For example, the
   boolean formula .x1 _ :x2 / ^ .:x1 _ x3 / ^ .:x2 _ :x3 / is in 2-CNF. (It has
   the satisfying assignment x1 D 1; x2 D 0; x3 D 1.) Although we can deter-
   mine in polynomial time whether a 2-CNF formula is satisﬁable, we shall see
   later in this chapter that determining whether a 3-CNF formula is satisﬁable is
   NP-complete.

NP-completeness and the classes P and NP
Throughout this chapter, we shall refer to three classes of problems: P, NP, and
NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. We describe them infor-
mally here, and we shall deﬁne them more formally later on.
   The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in polynomial time.
More speciﬁcally, they are problems that can be solved in time O.nk / for some
constant k, where n is the size of the input to the problem. Most of the problems
examined in previous chapters are in P.
   The class NP consists of those problems that are “veriﬁable” in polynomial time.
What do we mean by a problem being veriﬁable? If we were somehow given a
“certiﬁcate” of a solution, then we could verify that the certiﬁcate is correct in time
polynomial in the size of the input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-
cycle problem, given a directed graph G D .V; E/, a certiﬁcate would be a se-
quence h1 ; 2 ; 3 ; : : : ; jV j i of jV j vertices. We could easily check in polynomial
time that .i ; i C1 / 2 E for i D 1; 2; 3; : : : ; jV j  1 and that .jV j ; 1 / 2 E as well.
As another example, for 3-CNF satisﬁability, a certiﬁcate would be an assignment
of values to variables. We could check in polynomial time that this assignment
satisﬁes the boolean formula.
   Any problem in P is also in NP, since if a problem is in P then we can solve it
in polynomial time without even being supplied a certiﬁcate. We shall formalize
this notion later in this chapter, but for now we can believe that P  NP. The open
question is whether or not P is a proper subset of NP.
