1078       Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


           34.3-7
           Show that, with respect to polynomial-time reductions (see Exercise 34.3-6), L is
           complete for NP if and only if L is complete for co-NP.

           34.3-8
           The reduction algorithm F in the proof of Lemma 34.6 constructs the circuit
           C D f .x/ based on knowledge of x, A, and k. Professor Sartre observes that
           the string x is input to F , but only the existence of A, k, and the constant factor
           implicit in the O.nk / running time is known to F (since the language L belongs
           to NP), not their actual values. Thus, the professor concludes that F can’t possi-
           bly construct the circuit C and that the language CIRCUIT-SAT is not necessarily
           NP-hard. Explain the ﬂaw in the professor’s reasoning.



34.4 NP-completeness proofs

           We proved that the circuit-satisﬁability problem is NP-complete by a direct proof
           that L P CIRCUIT-SAT for every language L 2 NP. In this section, we shall
           show how to prove that languages are NP-complete without directly reducing every
           language in NP to the given language. We shall illustrate this methodology by
           proving that various formula-satisﬁability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5
           provides many more examples of the methodology.
              The following lemma is the basis of our method for showing that a language is
           NP-complete.

           Lemma 34.8
           If L is a language such that L0 P L for some L0 2 NPC, then L is NP-hard. If, in
           addition, L 2 NP, then L 2 NPC.

           Proof Since L0 is NP-complete, for all L00 2 NP, we have L00 P L0 . By sup-
           position, L0 P L, and thus by transitivity (Exercise 34.3-2), we have L00 P L,
           which shows that L is NP-hard. If L 2 NP, we also have L 2 NPC.

              In other words, by reducing a known NP-complete language L0 to L, we implic-
           itly reduce every language in NP to L. Thus, Lemma 34.8 gives us a method for
           proving that a language L is NP-complete:
           1. Prove L 2 NP.
           2. Select a known NP-complete language L0 .
