Problems for Chapter 16                                                              449


   monotonically decreasing order by penalty. Analyze the running time of your
   implementation.

16-5 Off-line caching
Modern computers use a cache to store a small amount of data in a fast memory.
Even though a program may access large amounts of data, by storing a small subset
of the main memory in the cache—a small but faster memory—overall access time
can greatly decrease. When a computer program executes, it makes a sequence
hr1 ; r2 ; : : : ; rn i of n memory requests, where each request is for a particular data
element. For example, a program that accesses 4 distinct elements fa; b; c; d g
might make the sequence of requests hd; b; d; b; d; a; c; d; b; a; c; bi. Let k be the
size of the cache. When the cache contains k elements and the program requests the
.k C 1/st element, the system must decide, for this and each subsequent request,
which k elements to keep in the cache. More precisely, for each request ri , the
cache-management algorithm checks whether element ri is already in the cache. If
it is, then we have a cache hit; otherwise, we have a cache miss. Upon a cache
miss, the system retrieves ri from the main memory, and the cache-management
algorithm must decide whether to keep ri in the cache. If it decides to keep ri and
the cache already holds k elements, then it must evict one element to make room
for ri . The cache-management algorithm evicts data with the goal of minimizing
the number of cache misses over the entire sequence of requests.
   Typically, caching is an on-line problem. That is, we have to make decisions
about which data to keep in the cache without knowing the future requests. Here,
however, we consider the off-line version of this problem, in which we are given
in advance the entire sequence of n requests and the cache size k, and we wish to
minimize the total number of cache misses.
   We can solve this off-line problem by a greedy strategy called furthest-in-future,
which chooses to evict the item in the cache whose next access in the request
sequence comes furthest in the future.

a. Write pseudocode for a cache manager that uses the furthest-in-future strategy.
   The input should be a sequence hr1 ; r2 ; : : : ; rn i of requests and a cache size k,
   and the output should be a sequence of decisions about which data element (if
   any) to evict upon each request. What is the running time of your algorithm?

b. Show that the off-line caching problem exhibits optimal substructure.

c. Prove that furthest-in-future produces the minimum possible number of cache
   misses.
