34.4 NP-completeness proofs                                                    1079


3. Describe an algorithm that computes a function f mapping every instance
   x 2 f0; 1g of L0 to an instance f .x/ of L.
4. Prove that the function f satisﬁes x 2 L0 if and only if f .x/ 2 L for all
   x 2 f0; 1g .
5. Prove that the algorithm computing f runs in polynomial time.
(Steps 2–5 show that L is NP-hard.) This methodology of reducing from a sin-
gle known NP-complete language is far simpler than the more complicated pro-
cess of showing directly how to reduce from every language in NP. Proving
CIRCUIT-SAT 2 NPC has given us a “foot in the door.” Because we know that the
circuit-satisﬁability problem is NP-complete, we now can prove much more easily
that other problems are NP-complete. Moreover, as we develop a catalog of known
NP-complete problems, we will have more and more choices for languages from
which to reduce.

Formula satisﬁability
We illustrate the reduction methodology by giving an NP-completeness proof for
the problem of determining whether a boolean formula, not a circuit, is satisﬁable.
This problem has the historical honor of being the ﬁrst problem ever shown to be
NP-complete.
   We formulate the (formula) satisﬁability problem in terms of the language SAT
as follows. An instance of SAT is a boolean formula  composed of
1. n boolean variables: x1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xn ;
2. m boolean connectives: any boolean function with one or two inputs and one
   output, such as ^ (AND), _ (OR), : (NOT), ! (implication), $ (if and only
   if); and
3. parentheses. (Without loss of generality, we assume that there are no redundant
   parentheses, i.e., a formula contains at most one pair of parentheses per boolean
   connective.)
We can easily encode a boolean formula  in a length that is polynomial in n C m.
As in boolean combinational circuits, a truth assignment for a boolean formula 
is a set of values for the variables of , and a satisfying assignment is a truth
assignment that causes it to evaluate to 1. A formula with a satisfying assignment
is a satisﬁable formula. The satisﬁability problem asks whether a given boolean
formula is satisﬁable; in formal-language terms,
SAT D fhi W  is a satisﬁable boolean formulag :
As an example, the formula
