1200   Appendix C   Counting and Probability


       follows from equation (C.22), with a D E ŒX . Rewriting equation (C.27) yields
       an expression for the expectation of the square of a random variable:
          
       E X 2 D Var ŒX  C E2 ŒX  :                                            (C.28)
         The variance of a random variable X and the variance of aX are related (see
       Exercise C.3-10):
       Var ŒaX  D a2 Var ŒX  :
       When X and Y are independent random variables,
       Var ŒX C Y  D Var ŒX  C Var ŒY  :
       In general, if n random variables X1 ; X2 ; : : : ; Xn are pairwise independent, then
           " n      #
            X             Xn
       Var      Xi D         Var ŒXi  :                                                (C.29)
            i D1          i D1

          The standard deviation of a random variable X is the nonnegative square root
       of the variance of X . The standard deviation of a random variable X is sometimes
       denoted X or simply when the random variable X is understood from context.
       With this notation, the variance of X is denoted 2 .

       Exercises

       C.3-1
       Suppose we roll two ordinary, 6-sided dice. What is the expectation of the sum
       of the two values showing? What is the expectation of the maximum of the two
       values showing?

       C.3-2
       An array AŒ1 : : n contains n distinct numbers that are randomly ordered, with each
       permutation of the n numbers being equally likely. What is the expectation of the
       index of the maximum element in the array? What is the expectation of the index
       of the minimum element in the array?

       C.3-3
       A carnival game consists of three dice in a cage. A player can bet a dollar on any
       of the numbers 1 through 6. The cage is shaken, and the payoff is as follows. If the
       player’s number doesn’t appear on any of the dice, he loses his dollar. Otherwise,
       if his number appears on exactly k of the three dice, for k D 1; 2; 3, he keeps his
       dollar and wins k more dollars. What is his expected gain from playing the carnival
       game once?
