              B.5 Trees                                                                        1173


              Show that the result is even by proving the handshaking lemma: if G D .V; E/ is
              an undirected graph, then
              X
                  degree./ D 2 jEj :
              2V


              B.4-2
              Show that if a directed or undirected graph contains a path between two vertices u
              and , then it contains a simple path between u and . Show that if a directed graph
              contains a cycle, then it contains a simple cycle.

              B.4-3
              Show that any connected, undirected graph G D .V; E/ satisﬁes jEj  jV j  1.

              B.4-4
              Verify that in an undirected graph, the “is reachable from” relation is an equiv-
              alence relation on the vertices of the graph. Which of the three properties of an
              equivalence relation hold in general for the “is reachable from” relation on the
              vertices of a directed graph?

              B.4-5
              What is the undirected version of the directed graph in Figure B.2(a)? What is the
              directed version of the undirected graph in Figure B.2(b)?

              B.4-6 ?
              Show that we can represent a hypergraph by a bipartite graph if we let incidence in
              the hypergraph correspond to adjacency in the bipartite graph. (Hint: Let one set
              of vertices in the bipartite graph correspond to vertices of the hypergraph, and let
              the other set of vertices of the bipartite graph correspond to hyperedges.)



B.5   Trees

              As with graphs, there are many related, but slightly different, notions of trees. This
              section presents deﬁnitions and mathematical properties of several kinds of trees.
              Sections 10.4 and 22.1 describe how we can represent trees in computer memory.

              B.5.1 Free trees
              As deﬁned in Section B.4, a free tree is a connected, acyclic, undirected graph. We
              often omit the adjective “free” when we say that a graph is a tree. If an undirected
              graph is acyclic but possibly disconnected, it is a forest. Many algorithms that work
