200          Chapter 8 Sorting in Linear Time


             8.3-2
             Which of the following sorting algorithms are stable: insertion sort, merge sort,
             heapsort, and quicksort? Give a simple scheme that makes any sorting algorithm
             stable. How much additional time and space does your scheme entail?

             8.3-3
             Use induction to prove that radix sort works. Where does your proof need the
             assumption that the intermediate sort is stable?

             8.3-4
             Show how to sort n integers in the range 0 to n3  1 in O.n/ time.

             8.3-5 ?
             In the ﬁrst card-sorting algorithm in this section, exactly how many sorting passes
             are needed to sort d -digit decimal numbers in the worst case? How many piles of
             cards would an operator need to keep track of in the worst case?



8.4   Bucket sort

             Bucket sort assumes that the input is drawn from a uniform distribution and has an
             average-case running time of O.n/. Like counting sort, bucket sort is fast because
             it assumes something about the input. Whereas counting sort assumes that the input
             consists of integers in a small range, bucket sort assumes that the input is generated
             by a random process that distributes elements uniformly and independently over
             the interval Œ0; 1/. (See Section C.2 for a deﬁnition of uniform distribution.)
                 Bucket sort divides the interval Œ0; 1/ into n equal-sized subintervals, or buckets,
             and then distributes the n input numbers into the buckets. Since the inputs are uni-
             formly and independently distributed over Œ0; 1/, we do not expect many numbers
             to fall into each bucket. To produce the output, we simply sort the numbers in each
             bucket and then go through the buckets in order, listing the elements in each.
                 Our code for bucket sort assumes that the input is an n-element array A and
             that each element AŒi in the array satisﬁes 0  AŒi < 1. The code requires an
             auxiliary array BŒ0 : : n  1 of linked lists (buckets) and assumes that there is a
             mechanism for maintaining such lists. (Section 10.2 describes how to implement
             basic operations on linked lists.)
