           Problems for Chapter 2                                                                39


           2.3-3
           Use mathematical induction to show that when n is an exact power of 2, the solu-
           tion of the recurrence
                     (
                       2            if n D 2 ;
           T .n/ D
                       2T .n=2/ C n if n D 2k , for k > 1
           is T .n/ D n lg n.

           2.3-4
           We can express insertion sort as a recursive procedure as follows. In order to sort
           AŒ1 : : n, we recursively sort AŒ1 : : n  1 and then insert AŒn into the sorted array
           AŒ1 : : n  1. Write a recurrence for the running time of this recursive version of
           insertion sort.

           2.3-5
           Referring back to the searching problem (see Exercise 2.1-3), observe that if the
           sequence A is sorted, we can check the midpoint of the sequence against  and
           eliminate half of the sequence from further consideration. The binary search al-
           gorithm repeats this procedure, halving the size of the remaining portion of the
           sequence each time. Write pseudocode, either iterative or recursive, for binary
           search. Argue that the worst-case running time of binary search is ‚.lg n/.

           2.3-6
           Observe that the while loop of lines 5–7 of the I NSERTION -S ORT procedure in
           Section 2.1 uses a linear search to scan (backward) through the sorted subarray
           AŒ1 : : j  1. Can we use a binary search (see Exercise 2.3-5) instead to improve
           the overall worst-case running time of insertion sort to ‚.n lg n/?

           2.3-7 ?
           Describe a ‚.n lg n/-time algorithm that, given a set S of n integers and another
           integer x, determines whether or not there exist two elements in S whose sum is
           exactly x.



Problems

           2-1 Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort
           Although merge sort runs in ‚.n lg n/ worst-case time and insertion sort runs
           in ‚.n2 / worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort can make it faster
           in practice for small problem sizes on many machines. Thus, it makes sense to
           coarsen the leaves of the recursion by using insertion sort within merge sort when
