31.7 The RSA public-key cryptosystem                                             959


for electronically signed business contracts, electronic checks, electronic purchase
orders, and other electronic communications that parties wish to authenticate.
   The RSA public-key cryptosystem relies on the dramatic difference between the
ease of ﬁnding large prime numbers and the difﬁculty of factoring the product of
two large prime numbers. Section 31.8 describes an efﬁcient procedure for ﬁnding
large prime numbers, and Section 31.9 discusses the problem of factoring large
integers.

Public-key cryptosystems
In a public-key cryptosystem, each participant has both a public key and a secret
key. Each key is a piece of information. For example, in the RSA cryptosystem,
each key consists of a pair of integers. The participants “Alice” and “Bob” are
traditionally used in cryptography examples; we denote their public and secret
keys as PA , SA for Alice and PB , SB for Bob.
   Each participant creates his or her own public and secret keys. Secret keys are
kept secret, but public keys can be revealed to anyone or even published. In fact,
it is often convenient to assume that everyone’s public key is available in a pub-
lic directory, so that any participant can easily obtain the public key of any other
participant.
   The public and secret keys specify functions that can be applied to any message.
Let D denote the set of permissible messages. For example, D might be the set of
all ﬁnite-length bit sequences. In the simplest, and original, formulation of public-
key cryptography, we require that the public and secret keys specify one-to-one
functions from D to itself. We denote the function corresponding to Alice’s public
key PA by PA ./ and the function corresponding to her secret key SA by SA ./. The
functions PA ./ and SA ./ are thus permutations of D. We assume that the functions
PA ./ and SA ./ are efﬁciently computable given the corresponding key PA or SA .
   The public and secret keys for any participant are a “matched pair” in that they
specify functions that are inverses of each other. That is,
M    D SA .PA .M // ;                                                        (31.35)
M    D PA .SA .M //                                                          (31.36)
for any message M 2 D. Transforming M with the two keys PA and SA succes-
sively, in either order, yields the message M back.
   In a public-key cryptosystem, we require that no one but Alice be able to com-
pute the function SA ./ in any practical amount of time. This assumption is crucial
to keeping encrypted mail sent to Alice private and to knowing that Alice’s digi-
tal signatures are authentic. Alice must keep SA secret; if she does not, she loses
her uniqueness and the cryptosystem cannot provide her with unique capabilities.
The assumption that only Alice can compute SA ./ must hold even though everyone
