448   Chapter 16 Greedy Algorithms


      16-3 Acyclic subgraphs
      a. The incidence matrix for an undirected graph G D .V; E/ is a jV j jEj ma-
         trix M such that Me D 1 if edge e is incident on vertex , and Me D 0 other-
         wise. Argue that a set of columns of M is linearly independent over the ﬁeld
         of integers modulo 2 if and only if the corresponding set of edges is acyclic.
         Then, use the result of Exercise 16.4-2 to provide an alternate proof that .E;  /
         of part (a) is a matroid.

      b. Suppose that we associate a nonnegative weight w.e/ with each edge in an
         undirected graph G D .V; E/. Give an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd an acyclic
         subset of E of maximum total weight.

      c. Let G.V; E/ be an arbitrary directed graph, and let .E;  / be deﬁned so that
         A 2  if and only if A does not contain any directed cycles. Give an example
         of a directed graph G such that the associated system .E;  / is not a matroid.
         Specify which deﬁning condition for a matroid fails to hold.

      d. The incidence matrix for a directed graph G D .V; E/ with no self-loops is a
         jV j jEj matrix M such that Me D 1 if edge e leaves vertex , Me D 1 if
         edge e enters vertex , and Me D 0 otherwise. Argue that if a set of columns
         of M is linearly independent, then the corresponding set of edges does not
         contain a directed cycle.

      e. Exercise 16.4-2 tells us that the set of linearly independent sets of columns of
         any matrix M forms a matroid. Explain carefully why the results of parts (d)
         and (e) are not contradictory. How can there fail to be a perfect correspon-
         dence between the notion of a set of edges being acyclic and the notion of the
         associated set of columns of the incidence matrix being linearly independent?

      16-4 Scheduling variations
      Consider the following algorithm for the problem from Section 16.5 of scheduling
      unit-time tasks with deadlines and penalties. Let all n time slots be initially empty,
      where time slot i is the unit-length slot of time that ﬁnishes at time i. We consider
      the tasks in order of monotonically decreasing penalty. When considering task aj ,
      if there exists a time slot at or before aj ’s deadline dj that is still empty, assign aj
      to the latest such slot, ﬁlling it. If there is no such slot, assign task aj to the latest
      of the as yet unﬁlled slots.

      a. Argue that this algorithm always gives an optimal answer.

      b. Use the fast disjoint-set forest presented in Section 21.3 to implement the algo-
         rithm efﬁciently. Assume that the set of input tasks has already been sorted into
