712   Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


      antiparallel edges. Figure 26.2(b) displays this equivalent network. We choose
      one of the two antiparallel edges, in this case .1 ; 2 /, and split it by adding a new
      vertex  0 and replacing edge .1 ; 2 / with the pair of edges .1 ;  0 / and . 0 ; 2 /.
      We also set the capacity of both new edges to the capacity of the original edge.
      The resulting network satisﬁes the property that if an edge is in the network, the
      reverse edge is not. Exercise 26.1-1 asks you to prove that the resulting network is
      equivalent to the original one.
         Thus, we see that a real-world ﬂow problem might be most naturally modeled
      by a network with antiparallel edges. It will be convenient to disallow antipar-
      allel edges, however, and so we have a straightforward way to convert a network
      containing antiparallel edges into an equivalent one with no antiparallel edges.

      Networks with multiple sources and sinks
      A maximum-ﬂow problem may have several sources and sinks, rather than just
      one of each. The Lucky Puck Company, for example, might actually have a set
      of m factories fs1 ; s2 ; : : : ; sm g and a set of n warehouses ft1 ; t2 ; : : : ; tn g, as shown
      in Figure 26.3(a). Fortunately, this problem is no harder than ordinary maximum
      ﬂow.
         We can reduce the problem of determining a maximum ﬂow in a network with
      multiple sources and multiple sinks to an ordinary maximum-ﬂow problem. Fig-
      ure 26.3(b) shows how to convert the network from (a) to an ordinary ﬂow network
      with only a single source and a single sink. We add a supersource s and add a
      directed edge .s; si / with capacity c.s; si / D 1 for each i D 1; 2; : : : ; m. We also
      create a new supersink t and add a directed edge .ti ; t/ with capacity c.ti ; t/ D 1
      for each i D 1; 2; : : : ; n. Intuitively, any ﬂow in the network in (a) corresponds to
      a ﬂow in the network in (b), and vice versa. The single source s simply provides
      as much ﬂow as desired for the multiple sources si , and the single sink t likewise
      consumes as much ﬂow as desired for the multiple sinks ti . Exercise 26.1-2 asks
      you to prove formally that the two problems are equivalent.

      Exercises

      26.1-1
      Show that splitting an edge in a ﬂow network yields an equivalent network. More
      formally, suppose that ﬂow network G contains edge .u; /, and we create a new
      ﬂow network G 0 by creating a new vertex x and replacing .u; / by new edges
      .u; x/ and .x; / with c.u; x/ D c.x; / D c.u; /. Show that a maximum ﬂow
      in G 0 has the same value as a maximum ﬂow in G.
