130         Chapter 5 Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms


            the following recursive procedure returns a random m-subset S of f1; 2; 3; : : : ; ng,
            in which each m-subset is equally likely, while making only m calls to R ANDOM:

            R ANDOM -S AMPLE .m; n/
            1 if m == 0
            2      return ;
            3 else S D R ANDOM -S AMPLE .m  1; n  1/
            4      i D R ANDOM.1; n/
            5      if i 2 S
            6           S D S [ fng
            7      else S D S [ fig
            8      return S



? 5.4 Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables

            This advanced section further illustrates probabilistic analysis by way of four ex-
            amples. The ﬁrst determines the probability that in a room of k people, two of
            them share the same birthday. The second example examines what happens when
            we randomly toss balls into bins. The third investigates “streaks” of consecutive
            heads when we ﬂip coins. The ﬁnal example analyzes a variant of the hiring prob-
            lem in which you have to make decisions without actually interviewing all the
            candidates.

            5.4.1   The birthday paradox
            Our ﬁrst example is the birthday paradox. How many people must there be in a
            room before there is a 50% chance that two of them were born on the same day of
            the year? The answer is surprisingly few. The paradox is that it is in fact far fewer
            than the number of days in a year, or even half the number of days in a year, as we
            shall see.
               To answer this question, we index the people in the room with the integers
            1; 2; : : : ; k, where k is the number of people in the room. We ignore the issue
            of leap years and assume that all years have n D 365 days. For i D 1; 2; : : : ; k,
            let bi be the day of the year on which person i’s birthday falls, where 1  bi  n.
            We also assume that birthdays are uniformly distributed across the n days of the
            year, so that Pr fbi D rg D 1=n for i D 1; 2; : : : ; k and r D 1; 2; : : : ; n.
               The probability that two given people, say i and j , have matching birthdays
            depends on whether the random selection of birthdays is independent. We assume
            from now on that birthdays are independent, so that the probability that i’s birthday
