           29.2 Formulating problems as linear programs                                     859




29.2 Formulating problems as linear programs

           Although we shall focus on the simplex algorithm in this chapter, it is also impor-
           tant to be able to recognize when we can formulate a problem as a linear program.
           Once we cast a problem as a polynomial-sized linear program, we can solve it
           in polynomial time by the ellipsoid algorithm or interior-point methods. Several
           linear-programming software packages can solve problems efﬁciently, so that once
           the problem is in the form of a linear program, such a package can solve it.
              We shall look at several concrete examples of linear-programming problems. We
           start with two problems that we have already studied: the single-source shortest-
           paths problem (see Chapter 24) and the maximum-ﬂow problem (see Chapter 26).
           We then describe the minimum-cost-ﬂow problem. Although the minimum-cost-
           ﬂow problem has a polynomial-time algorithm that is not based on linear program-
           ming, we won’t describe the algorithm. Finally, we describe the multicommodity-
           ﬂow problem, for which the only known polynomial-time algorithm is based on
           linear programming.
              When we solved graph problems in Part VI, we used attribute notation, such
           as :d and .u; /:f . Linear programs typically use subscripted variables rather
           than objects with attached attributes, however. Therefore, when we express vari-
           ables in linear programs, we shall indicate vertices and edges through subscripts.
           For example, we denote the shortest-path weight for vertex  not by :d but by d .
           Similarly, we denote the ﬂow from vertex u to vertex  not by .u; /:f but by fu .
           For quantities that are given as inputs to problems, such as edge weights or capac-
           ities, we shall continue to use notations such as w.u; / and c.u:/.

           Shortest paths
           We can formulate the single-source shortest-paths problem as a linear program.
           In this section, we shall focus on how to formulate the single-pair shortest-path
           problem, leaving the extension to the more general single-source shortest-paths
           problem as Exercise 29.2-3.
              In the single-pair shortest-path problem, we are given a weighted, directed graph
           G D .V; E/, with weight function w W E ! R mapping edges to real-valued
           weights, a source vertex s, and destination vertex t. We wish to compute the
           value d t , which is the weight of a shortest path from s to t. To express this prob-
           lem as a linear program, we need to determine a set of variables and constraints that
           deﬁne when we have a shortest path from s to t. Fortunately, the Bellman-Ford al-
           gorithm does exactly this. When the Bellman-Ford algorithm terminates, it has
           computed, for each vertex , a value d (using subscript notation here rather than
           attribute notation) such that for each edge .u; / 2 E, we have d  du C w.u; /.
