20   van Emde Boas Trees




     In previous chapters, we saw data structures that support the operations of a priority
     queue—binary heaps in Chapter 6, red-black trees in Chapter 13,1 and Fibonacci
     heaps in Chapter 19. In each of these data structures, at least one important op-
     eration took O.lg n/ time, either worst case or amortized. In fact, because each
     of these data structures bases its decisions on comparing keys, the .n lg n/ lower
     bound for sorting in Section 8.1 tells us that at least one operation will have to
     take .lg n/ time. Why? If we could perform both the I NSERT and E XTRACT-M IN
     operations in o.lg n/ time, then we could sort n keys in o.n lg n/ time by ﬁrst per-
     forming n I NSERT operations, followed by n E XTRACT-M IN operations.
        We saw in Chapter 8, however, that sometimes we can exploit additional infor-
     mation about the keys to sort in o.n lg n/ time. In particular, with counting sort
     we can sort n keys, each an integer in the range 0 to k, in time ‚.n C k/, which
     is ‚.n/ when k D O.n/.
        Since we can circumvent the .n lg n/ lower bound for sorting when the keys are
     integers in a bounded range, you might wonder whether we can perform each of the
     priority-queue operations in o.lg n/ time in a similar scenario. In this chapter, we
     shall see that we can: van Emde Boas trees support the priority-queue operations,
     and a few others, each in O.lg lg n/ worst-case time. The hitch is that the keys
     must be integers in the range 0 to n  1, with no duplicates allowed.
        Speciﬁcally, van Emde Boas trees support each of the dynamic set operations
     listed on page 230—S EARCH, I NSERT, D ELETE, M INIMUM, M AXIMUM, S UC -
     CESSOR , and P REDECESSOR —in O.lg lg n/ time. In this chapter, we will omit
     discussion of satellite data and focus only on storing keys. Because we concentrate
     on keys and disallow duplicate keys to be stored, instead of describing the S EARCH


     1 Chapter 13 does not explicitly discuss how to implement E XTRACT-M IN and D ECREASE -K EY , but

     we can easily build these operations for any data structure that supports M INIMUM, D ELETE , and
     I NSERT .
