           Problems for Appendix C                                                               1215


           C.5-6 ?
           Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where in the ith trial, for i D 1; 2; : : : ; n,
           success occurs with probability pi and failure occurs with probability qi D 1  pi .
           Let X be the random variable describing the total number of successes, and let
             D E ŒX . Show that for r  0,
                                     2
           Pr fX       rg  e r =2n :
                                                        2
           (Hint: Prove that pi e ˛qi C qi e ˛pi  e ˛ =2 . Then follow the outline of the proof
           of Theorem C.8, using this inequality in place of inequality (C.45).)

           C.5-7 ?
           Show that choosing ˛ D ln.r= / minimizes the right-hand side of inequal-
           ity (C.47).



Problems

           C-1 Balls and bins
           In this problem, we investigate the effect of various assumptions on the number of
           ways of placing n balls into b distinct bins.

           a. Suppose that the n balls are distinct and that their order within a bin does not
              matter. Argue that the number of ways of placing the balls in the bins is b n .

           b. Suppose that the balls are distinct and that the balls in each bin are ordered.
              Prove that there are exactly .b C n  1/Š=.b  1/Š ways to place the balls in the
              bins. (Hint: Consider the number of ways of arranging n distinct balls and b  1
              indistinguishable sticks in a row.)

           c. Suppose that the balls are identical, and hence their order within a bin does not
              matter. Show that the number of ways of placing the balls in the bins is bCn1
                                                                                          n
                                                                                              .
              (Hint: Of the arrangements in part (b), how many are repeated if the balls are
              made identical?)

           d. Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may contain more than one
              ball, so that n  b. Show that the number of ways of placing the balls is nb .

           e. Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may be left empty. Assuming
              that n  b, show that the number of ways of placing the balls is n1b1
                                                                                      .
