            33.2 Determining whether any pair of segments intersects                             1021


            the polygon, the set of points on the polygon itself forms its boundary, and the set
            of points surrounding the polygon forms its exterior. A simple polygon is convex
            if, given any two points on its boundary or in its interior, all points on the line
            segment drawn between them are contained in the polygon’s boundary or interior.
            A vertex of a convex polygon cannot be expressed as a convex combination of any
            two distinct points on the boundary or in the interior of the polygon.
               Professor Amundsen proposes the following method to determine whether a se-
            quence hp0 ; p1 ; : : : ; pn1 i of n points forms the consecutive vertices of a convex
            polygon. Output “yes” if the set f†pi pi C1 pi C2 W i D 0; 1; : : : ; n  1g, where sub-
            script addition is performed modulo n, does not contain both left turns and right
            turns; otherwise, output “no.” Show that although this method runs in linear time,
            it does not always produce the correct answer. Modify the professor’s method so
            that it always produces the correct answer in linear time.

            33.1-6
            Given a point p0 D .x0 ; y0 /, the right horizontal ray from p0 is the set of points
            fpi D .xi ; yi / W xi  x0 and yi D y0 g, that is, it is the set of points due right of p0
            along with p0 itself. Show how to determine whether a given right horizontal ray
            from p0 intersects a line segment p1 p2 in O.1/ time by reducing the problem to
            that of determining whether two line segments intersect.

            33.1-7
            One way to determine whether a point p0 is in the interior of a simple, but not
            necessarily convex, polygon P is to look at any ray from p0 and check that the ray
            intersects the boundary of P an odd number of times but that p0 itself is not on
            the boundary of P . Show how to compute in ‚.n/ time whether a point p0 is in
            the interior of an n-vertex polygon P . (Hint: Use Exercise 33.1-6. Make sure your
            algorithm is correct when the ray intersects the polygon boundary at a vertex and
            when the ray overlaps a side of the polygon.)

            33.1-8
            Show how to compute the area of an n-vertex simple, but not necessarily convex,
            polygon in ‚.n/ time. (See Exercise 33.1-5 for deﬁnitions pertaining to polygons.)



33.2 Determining whether any pair of segments intersects

            This section presents an algorithm for determining whether any two line segments
            in a set of segments intersect. The algorithm uses a technique known as “sweep-
            ing,” which is common to many computational-geometry algorithms. Moreover, as
