196   Chapter 8 Sorting in Linear Time


          Finally, the for loop of lines 10–12 places each element AŒj  into its correct
      sorted position in the output array B. If all n elements are distinct, then when we
      ﬁrst enter line 10, for each AŒj , the value C ŒAŒj  is the correct ﬁnal position
      of AŒj  in the output array, since there are C ŒAŒj  elements less than or equal
      to AŒj . Because the elements might not be distinct, we decrement C ŒAŒj  each
      time we place a value AŒj  into the B array. Decrementing C ŒAŒj  causes the
      next input element with a value equal to AŒj , if one exists, to go to the position
      immediately before AŒj  in the output array.
          How much time does counting sort require? The for loop of lines 2–3 takes
      time ‚.k/, the for loop of lines 4–5 takes time ‚.n/, the for loop of lines 7–8 takes
      time ‚.k/, and the for loop of lines 10–12 takes time ‚.n/. Thus, the overall time
      is ‚.k C n/. In practice, we usually use counting sort when we have k D O.n/, in
      which case the running time is ‚.n/.
          Counting sort beats the lower bound of .n lg n/ proved in Section 8.1 because
      it is not a comparison sort. In fact, no comparisons between input elements occur
      anywhere in the code. Instead, counting sort uses the actual values of the elements
      to index into an array. The .n lg n/ lower bound for sorting does not apply when
      we depart from the comparison sort model.
          An important property of counting sort is that it is stable: numbers with the same
      value appear in the output array in the same order as they do in the input array. That
      is, it breaks ties between two numbers by the rule that whichever number appears
      ﬁrst in the input array appears ﬁrst in the output array. Normally, the property of
      stability is important only when satellite data are carried around with the element
      being sorted. Counting sort’s stability is important for another reason: counting
      sort is often used as a subroutine in radix sort. As we shall see in the next section,
      in order for radix sort to work correctly, counting sort must be stable.

      Exercises

      8.2-1
      Using Figure 8.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of C OUNTING -S ORT on the
      array A D h6; 0; 2; 0; 1; 3; 4; 6; 1; 3; 2i.

      8.2-2
      Prove that C OUNTING -S ORT is stable.

      8.2-3
      Suppose that we were to rewrite the for loop header in line 10 of the C OUNTING -
      S ORT as
      10   for j D 1 to A:length
      Show that the algorithm still works properly. Is the modiﬁed algorithm stable?
