864        Chapter 29 Linear Programming


           linear program for which the solution has the property that d is the shortest-path
           weight from s to  for each vertex  2 V .

           29.2-4
           Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to ﬁnding the maximum ﬂow
           in Figure 26.1(a).

           29.2-5
           Rewrite the linear program for maximum ﬂow (29.47)–(29.50) so that it uses only
           O.V C E/ constraints.

           29.2-6
           Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graph G D .V; E/, solves the maxi-
           mum-bipartite-matching problem.

           29.2-7
           In the minimum-cost multicommodity-ﬂow problem, we are given directed graph
           G D .V; E/ in which each edge .u; / 2 E has a nonnegative capacity c.u; /  0
           and a cost a.u; /. As in the multicommodity-ﬂow problem, we are given k dif-
           ferent commodities, K1 ; K2 ; : : : ; Kk , where we specify commodity i by the triple
           Ki D .si ; ti ; di /. We deﬁne the ﬂow fi for commodity i and the aggregate ﬂow fu
           on edge .u; / as in the multicommodity-ﬂow problem. A feasible ﬂow is one
           in which the aggregate ﬂow on each     Pedge .u; / is no more than the capacity of
           edge .u; /. The cost of a ﬂow is u;2V a.u; /fu , and the goal is to ﬁnd the
           feasible ﬂow of minimum cost. Express this problem as a linear program.



29.3 The simplex algorithm

           The simplex algorithm is the classical method for solving linear programs. In con-
           trast to most of the other algorithms in this book, its running time is not polynomial
           in the worst case. It does yield insight into linear programs, however, and is often
           remarkably fast in practice.
              In addition to having a geometric interpretation, described earlier in this chapter,
           the simplex algorithm bears some similarity to Gaussian elimination, discussed in
           Section 28.1. Gaussian elimination begins with a system of linear equalities whose
           solution is unknown. In each iteration, we rewrite this system in an equivalent
           form that has some additional structure. After some number of iterations, we have
           rewritten the system so that the solution is simple to obtain. The simplex algo-
           rithm proceeds in a similar manner, and we can view it as Gaussian elimination for
           inequalities.
