29.3 The simplex algorithm                                                         871


In Section 29.5, we shall show how to determine whether a problem is feasible,
and if so, how to ﬁnd a slack form in which the initial basic solution is feasible.
Therefore, let us assume that we have a procedure I NITIALIZE -S IMPLEX .A; b; c/
that takes as input a linear program in standard form, that is, an m n matrix
A D .aij /, an m-vector b D .bi /, and an n-vector c D .cj /. If the problem is
infeasible, the procedure returns a message that the program is infeasible and then
terminates. Otherwise, the procedure returns a slack form for which the initial
basic solution is feasible.
   The procedure S IMPLEX takes as input a linear program in standard form, as just
described. It returns an n-vector xN D .xNj / that is an optimal solution to the linear
program described in (29.19)–(29.21).

S IMPLEX .A; b; c/
 1 .N; B; A; b; c; / D I NITIALIZE -S IMPLEX .A; b; c/
 2 let be a new vector of length n
 3 while some index j 2 N has cj > 0
 4      choose an index e 2 N for which ce > 0
 5      for each index i 2 B
 6           if ai e > 0
 7                       i D bi =ai e
 8           else i D 1
 9      choose an index l 2 B that minimizes i
10      if l == 1
11           return “unbounded”
12      else .N; B; A; b; c; / D P IVOT .N; B; A; b; c; ; l; e/
13 for i D 1 to n
14      if i 2 B
15           xN i D bi
16      else xN i D 0
17 return .xN 1 ; xN 2 ; : : : ; xN n /

   The S IMPLEX procedure works as follows. In line 1, it calls the procedure
I NITIALIZE -S IMPLEX .A; b; c/, described above, which either determines that the
linear program is infeasible or returns a slack form for which the basic solution is
feasible. The while loop of lines 3–12 forms the main part of the algorithm. If all
coefﬁcients in the objective function are negative, then the while loop terminates.
Otherwise, line 4 selects a variable xe , whose coefﬁcient in the objective function
is positive, as the entering variable. Although we may choose any such variable as
the entering variable, we assume that we use some prespeciﬁed deterministic rule.
Next, lines 5–9 check each constraint and pick the one that most severely limits
the amount by which we can increase xe without violating any of the nonnegativ-
