Introduction

               This part returns to studying data structures that support operations on dynamic
               sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III. Two of the chapters, for example,
               make extensive use of the amortized analysis techniques we saw in Chapter 17.
                  Chapter 18 presents B-trees, which are balanced search trees speciﬁcally de-
               signed to be stored on disks. Because disks operate much more slowly than
               random-access memory, we measure the performance of B-trees not only by how
               much computing time the dynamic-set operations consume but also by how many
               disk accesses they perform. For each B-tree operation, the number of disk accesses
               increases with the height of the B-tree, but B-tree operations keep the height low.
                  Chapter 19 gives an implementation of a mergeable heap, which supports the
               operations I NSERT, M INIMUM, E XTRACT-M IN, and U NION.1 The U NION oper-
               ation unites, or merges, two heaps. Fibonacci heaps—the data structure in Chap-
               ter 19—also support the operations D ELETE and D ECREASE -K EY. We use amor-
               tized time bounds to measure the performance of Fibonacci heaps. The opera-
               tions I NSERT, M INIMUM, and U NION take only O.1/ actual and amortized time
               on Fibonacci heaps, and the operations E XTRACT-M IN and D ELETE take O.lg n/
               amortized time. The most signiﬁcant advantage of Fibonacci heaps, however, is
               that D ECREASE -K EY takes only O.1/ amortized time. Because the D ECREASE -


               1 As in Problem 10-2, we have deﬁned a mergeable heap to support M INIMUM and E XTRACT-M IN ,

               and so we can also refer to it as a mergeable min-heap. Alternatively, if it supported M AXIMUM
               and E XTRACT-M AX, it would be a mergeable max-heap. Unless we specify otherwise, mergeable
               heaps will be by default mergeable min-heaps.
