Problems for Chapter 8                                                            209


   The 0-1 sorting lemma provides a powerful way to prove that an oblivious
compare-exchange algorithm produces a sorted result. It states that if an oblivi-
ous compare-exchange algorithm correctly sorts all input sequences consisting of
only 0s and 1s, then it correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.
   You will prove the 0-1 sorting lemma by proving its contrapositive: if an oblivi-
ous compare-exchange algorithm fails to sort an input containing arbitrary values,
then it fails to sort some 0-1 input. Assume that an oblivious compare-exchange al-
gorithm X fails to correctly sort the array AŒ1 : : n. Let AŒp be the smallest value
in A that algorithm X puts into the wrong location, and let AŒq be the value that
algorithm X moves to the location into which AŒp should have gone. Deﬁne an
array BŒ1 : : n of 0s and 1s as follows:
         (
            0 if AŒi  AŒp ;
BŒi D
            1 if AŒi > AŒp :

a. Argue that AŒq > AŒp, so that BŒp D 0 and BŒq D 1.

b. To complete the proof of the 0-1 sorting lemma, prove that algorithm X fails to
   sort array B correctly.

   Now you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that a particular sorting algo-
rithm works correctly. The algorithm, columnsort, works on a rectangular array
of n elements. The array has r rows and s columns (so that n D rs), subject to
three restrictions:
   r must be even,
   s must be a divisor of r, and
   r  2s 2 .
When columnsort completes, the array is sorted in column-major order: reading
down the columns, from left to right, the elements monotonically increase.
   Columnsort operates in eight steps, regardless of the value of n. The odd steps
are all the same: sort each column individually. Each even step is a ﬁxed permuta-
tion. Here are the steps:
1. Sort each column.
2. Transpose the array, but reshape it back to r rows and s columns. In other
   words, turn the leftmost column into the top r=s rows, in order; turn the next
   column into the next r=s rows, in order; and so on.
3. Sort each column.
4. Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 2.
