1096   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


           u       4   v
               1
       3                   2
               1
           x           w
                   5


       Figure 34.18 An instance of the traveling-salesman problem. Shaded edges represent a minimum-
       cost tour, with cost 7.


       Because each vertex in each widget is visited by some cover path, we see that each
       edge in E is covered by some vertex in V  .


       34.5.4      The traveling-salesman problem
       In the traveling-salesman problem, which is closely related to the hamiltonian-
       cycle problem, a salesman must visit n cities. Modeling the problem as a complete
       graph with n vertices, we can say that the salesman wishes to make a tour, or
       hamiltonian cycle, visiting each city exactly once and ﬁnishing at the city he starts
       from. The salesman incurs a nonnegative integer cost c.i; j / to travel from city i
       to city j , and the salesman wishes to make the tour whose total cost is minimum,
       where the total cost is the sum of the individual costs along the edges of the tour.
       For example, in Figure 34.18, a minimum-cost tour is hu; w; ; x; ui, with cost 7.
       The formal language for the corresponding decision problem is
       TSP D fhG; c; ki W G D .V; E/ is a complete graph;
                          c is a function from V V ! Z;
                          k 2 Z, and
                          G has a traveling-salesman tour with cost at most kg :
         The following theorem shows that a fast algorithm for the traveling-salesman
       problem is unlikely to exist.

       Theorem 34.14
       The traveling-salesman problem is NP-complete.

       Proof We ﬁrst show that TSP belongs to NP. Given an instance of the problem,
       we use as a certiﬁcate the sequence of n vertices in the tour. The veriﬁcation
       algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex exactly once, sums up the
       edge costs, and checks whether the sum is at most k. This process can certainly be
       done in polynomial time.
