1062   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness




                                (a)                                                       (b)


       Figure 34.2 (a) A graph representing the vertices, edges, and faces of a dodecahedron, with a
       hamiltonian cycle shown by shaded edges. (b) A bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices.
       Any such graph is nonhamiltonian.


       containing all the vertices.7 The dodecahedron is hamiltonian, and Figure 34.2(a)
       shows one hamiltonian cycle. Not all graphs are hamiltonian, however. For ex-
       ample, Figure 34.2(b) shows a bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices.
       Exercise 34.2-2 asks you to show that all such graphs are nonhamiltonian.
         We can deﬁne the hamiltonian-cycle problem, “Does a graph G have a hamil-
       tonian cycle?” as a formal language:
       HAM-CYCLE D fhGi W G is a hamiltonian graphg :
       How might an algorithm decide the language HAM-CYCLE? Given a problem
       instance hGi, one possible decision algorithm lists all permutations of the vertices
       of G and then checks each permutation to see if it is a hamiltonian path. What is
       the running time of this algorithm? If we use the “reasonable” encodingpof a graph
       as its adjacency matrix, the number m of vertices in the graph is . n/, where
       n D jhGij is the length of the encoding of G. There are mŠ possible permutations


       7 In a letter dated 17 October 1856 to his friend John T. Graves, Hamilton [157, p. 624] wrote, “I

       have found that some young persons have been much amused by trying a new mathematical game
       which the Icosion furnishes, one person sticking ﬁve pins in any ﬁve consecutive points . . . and the
       other player then aiming to insert, which by the theory in this letter can always be done, ﬁfteen other
       pins, in cyclical succession, so as to cover all the other points, and to end in immediate proximity to
       the pin wherewith his antagonist had begun.”
