1134       Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms


           35.5-4
           How would you modify the approximation scheme presented in this section to ﬁnd
           a good approximation to the smallest value not less than t that is a sum of some
           subset of the given input list?

           35.5-5
           Modify the A PPROX -S UBSET-S UM procedure to also return the subset of S that
           sums to the value ´ .



Problems

           35-1 Bin packing
           Suppose that we are given a set of n objects, where the size si of the ith object
           satisﬁes 0 < si < 1. We wish to pack all the objects into the minimum number of
           unit-size bins. Each bin can hold any subset of the objects whose total size does
           not exceed 1.
           a. Prove that the problem of determining the minimum number of bins required is
              NP-hard. (Hint: Reduce from the subset-sum problem.)
           The ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic takes each
                                          Pobject in turn and places it into the ﬁrst bin that
                                            n
           can accommodate it. Let S D i D1 si .
           b. Argue that the optimal number of bins required is at least dSe.

           c. Argue that the ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic leaves at most one bin less than half full.

           d. Prove that the number of bins used by the ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic is never more
              than d2Se.

           e. Prove an approximation ratio of 2 for the ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic.

           f. Give an efﬁcient implementation of the ﬁrst-ﬁt heuristic, and analyze its running
              time.

           35-2 Approximating the size of a maximum clique
           Let G D .V; E/ be an undirected graph. For any k  1, deﬁne G .k/ to be the undi-
           rected graph .V .k/ ; E .k/ /, where V .k/ is the set of all ordered k-tuples of vertices
           from V and E .k/ is deﬁned so that .1 ; 2 ; : : : ; k / is adjacent to .w1 ; w2 ; : : : ; wk /
           if and only if for i D 1; 2; : : : ; k, either vertex i is adjacent to wi in G, or else
            i D wi .
