1086       Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


           34.4-4
           Show that the problem of determining whether a boolean formula is a tautology is
           complete for co-NP. (Hint: See Exercise 34.3-7.)

           34.4-5
           Show that the problem of determining the satisﬁability of boolean formulas in dis-
           junctive normal form is polynomial-time solvable.

           34.4-6
           Suppose that someone gives you a polynomial-time algorithm to decide formula
           satisﬁability. Describe how to use this algorithm to ﬁnd satisfying assignments in
           polynomial time.

           34.4-7
           Let 2-CNF-SAT be the set of satisﬁable boolean formulas in CNF with exactly 2
           literals per clause. Show that 2-CNF-SAT 2 P. Make your algorithm as efﬁcient as
           possible. (Hint: Observe that x _ y is equivalent to :x ! y. Reduce 2-CNF-SAT
           to an efﬁciently solvable problem on a directed graph.)



34.5 NP-complete problems

           NP-complete problems arise in diverse domains: boolean logic, graphs, arithmetic,
           network design, sets and partitions, storage and retrieval, sequencing and schedul-
           ing, mathematical programming, algebra and number theory, games and puzzles,
           automata and language theory, program optimization, biology, chemistry, physics,
           and more. In this section, we shall use the reduction methodology to provide NP-
           completeness proofs for a variety of problems drawn from graph theory and set
           partitioning.
             Figure 34.13 outlines the structure of the NP-completeness proofs in this section
           and Section 34.4. We prove each language in the ﬁgure to be NP-complete by
           reduction from the language that points to it. At the root is CIRCUIT-SAT, which
           we proved NP-complete in Theorem 34.7.

           34.5.1   The clique problem
           A clique in an undirected graph G D .V; E/ is a subset V 0  V of vertices, each
           pair of which is connected by an edge in E. In other words, a clique is a complete
           subgraph of G. The size of a clique is the number of vertices it contains. The
           clique problem is the optimization problem of ﬁnding a clique of maximum size in
