Introduction

               When we analyze algorithms, we often need to draw upon a body of mathematical
               tools. Some of these tools are as simple as high-school algebra, but others may be
               new to you. In Part I, we saw how to manipulate asymptotic notations and solve
               recurrences. This appendix comprises a compendium of several other concepts and
               methods we use to analyze algorithms. As noted in the introduction to Part I, you
               may have seen much of the material in this appendix before having read this book
               (although the speciﬁc notational conventions we use might occasionally differ from
               those you have seen elsewhere). Hence, you should treat this appendix as reference
               material. As in the rest of this book, however, we have included exercises and
               problems, in order for you to improve your skills in these areas.
                  Appendix A offers methods for evaluating and bounding summations, which
               occur frequently in the analysis of algorithms. Many of the formulas here appear
               in any calculus text, but you will ﬁnd it convenient to have these methods compiled
               in one place.
                  Appendix B contains basic deﬁnitions and notations for sets, relations, functions,
               graphs, and trees. It also gives some basic properties of these mathematical objects.
                  Appendix C begins with elementary principles of counting: permutations, com-
               binations, and the like. The remainder contains deﬁnitions and properties of basic
               probability. Most of the algorithms in this book require no probability for their
               analysis, and thus you can easily omit the latter sections of the chapter on a ﬁrst
               reading, even without skimming them. Later, when you encounter a probabilistic
               analysis that you want to understand better, you will ﬁnd Appendix C well orga-
               nized for reference purposes.
