736        Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


           that is, the set of vertices adjacent to some member of X . Prove Hall’s theorem:
           there exists a perfect matching in G if and only if jAj  jN.A/j for every subset
           A  L.

           26.3-5 ?
           We say that a bipartite graph G D .V; E/, where V D L [ R, is d-regular if every
           vertex  2 V has degree exactly d . Every d -regular bipartite graph has jLj D jRj.
           Prove that every d -regular bipartite graph has a matching of cardinality jLj by
           arguing that a minimum cut of the corresponding ﬂow network has capacity jLj.



? 26.4 Push-relabel algorithms

           In this section, we present the “push-relabel” approach to computing maximum
           ﬂows. To date, many of the asymptotically fastest maximum-ﬂow algorithms are
           push-relabel algorithms, and the fastest actual implementations of maximum-ﬂow
           algorithms are based on the push-relabel method. Push-relabel methods also efﬁ-
           ciently solve other ﬂow problems, such as the minimum-cost ﬂow problem. This
           section introduces Goldberg’s “generic” maximum-ﬂow algorithm, which has a
           simple implementation that runs in O.V 2 E/ time, thereby improving upon the
           O.VE 2 / bound of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm. Section 26.5 reﬁnes the generic
           algorithm to obtain another push-relabel algorithm that runs in O.V 3 / time.
              Push-relabel algorithms work in a more localized manner than the Ford-
           Fulkerson method. Rather than examine the entire residual network to ﬁnd an aug-
           menting path, push-relabel algorithms work on one vertex at a time, looking only
           at the vertex’s neighbors in the residual network. Furthermore, unlike the Ford-
           Fulkerson method, push-relabel algorithms do not maintain the ﬂow-conservation
           property throughout their execution. They do, however, maintain a preﬂow, which
           is a function f W V V ! R that satisﬁes the capacity constraint and the following
           relaxation of ﬂow conservation:
           X               X
                f .; u/     f .u; /  0
           2V           2V

           for all vertices u 2 V  fsg. That is, the ﬂow into a vertex may exceed the ﬂow
           out. We call the quantity
                    X               X
           e.u/ D        f .; u/    f .u; /                                      (26.14)
                   2V           2V

           the excess ﬂow into vertex u. The excess at a vertex is the amount by which the
           ﬂow in exceeds the ﬂow out. We say that a vertex u 2 V  fs; tg is overﬂowing if
           e.u/ > 0.
