958        Chapter 31 Number-Theoretic Algorithms


           Maintenance: Let c 0 and d 0 denote the values of c and d at the end of an iteration
             of the for loop, and thus the values prior to the next iteration. Each iteration
             updates c 0 D 2c (if bi D 0) or c 0 D 2c C 1 (if bi D 1), so that c will be correct
             prior to the next iteration. If bi D 0, then d 0 D d 2 mod n D .ac /2 mod n D
                              0
             a2c mod n D ac mod n. If bi D 1, then d 0 D d 2 a mod n D .ac /2 a mod n D
                                  0
             a2cC1 mod n D ac mod n. In either case, d D ac mod n prior to the next
             iteration.
           Termination: At termination, i D 1. Thus, c D b, since c has the value of the
              preﬁx hbk ; bk1 ; : : : ; b0 i of b’s binary representation. Hence d D ac mod n D
              ab mod n.
              If the inputs a, b, and n are ˇ-bit numbers, then the total number of arith-
           metic operations required is O.ˇ/ and the total number of bit operations required
           is O.ˇ 3 /.

           Exercises

           31.6-1
           Draw a table showing the order of every element in Z11 . Pick the smallest primitive
           root g and compute a table giving ind11;g .x/ for all x 2 Z11 .

           31.6-2
           Give a modular exponentiation algorithm that examines the bits of b from right to
           left instead of left to right.

           31.6-3
           Assuming that you know .n/, explain how to compute a1 mod n for any a 2 Zn
           using the procedure M ODULAR -E XPONENTIATION.



31.7 The RSA public-key cryptosystem

           With a public-key cryptosystem, we can encrypt messages sent between two com-
           municating parties so that an eavesdropper who overhears the encrypted messages
           will not be able to decode them. A public-key cryptosystem also enables a party
           to append an unforgeable “digital signature” to the end of an electronic message.
           Such a signature is the electronic version of a handwritten signature on a paper doc-
           ument. It can be easily checked by anyone, forged by no one, yet loses its validity
           if any bit of the message is altered. It therefore provides authentication of both the
           identity of the signer and the contents of the signed message. It is the perfect tool
