           Problems for Chapter 25                                                           705


           25.3-2
           What is the purpose of adding the new vertex s to V , yielding V 0 ?

           25.3-3
           Suppose that w.u; /  0 for all edges .u; / 2 E. What is the relationship
           between the weight functions w and y
                                              w?

           25.3-4
           Professor Greenstreet claims that there is a simpler way to reweight edges than
           the method used in Johnson’s algorithm. Letting w  D min.u;/2E fw.u; /g, just
           deﬁne yw.u; / D w.u; /  w  for all edges .u; / 2 E. What is wrong with the
           professor’s method of reweighting?

           25.3-5
           Suppose that we run Johnson’s algorithm on a directed graph G with weight func-
           tion w. Show that if G contains a 0-weight cycle c, then y
                                                                    w.u; / D 0 for every
           edge .u; / in c.

           25.3-6
           Professor Michener claims that there is no need to create a new source vertex in
           line 1 of J OHNSON. He claims that instead we can just use G 0 D G and let s be any
           vertex. Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G for which incorporating
           the professor’s idea into J OHNSON causes incorrect answers. Then show that if G
           is strongly connected (every vertex is reachable from every other vertex), the results
           returned by J OHNSON with the professor’s modiﬁcation are correct.



Problems

           25-1 Transitive closure of a dynamic graph
           Suppose that we wish to maintain the transitive closure of a directed graph G D
           .V; E/ as we insert edges into E. That is, after each edge has been inserted, we
           want to update the transitive closure of the edges inserted so far. Assume that the
           graph G has no edges initially and that we represent the transitive closure as a
           boolean matrix.
           a. Show how to update the transitive closure G  D .V; E  / of a graph G D .V; E/
              in O.V 2 / time when a new edge is added to G.

           b. Give an example of a graph G and an edge e such that .V 2 / time is required
              to update the transitive closure after the insertion of e into G, no matter what
              algorithm is used.
