874   Chapter 29 Linear Programming


      Termination: The while loop can terminate in one of two ways. If it terminates
         because of the condition in line 3, then the current basic solution is feasible and
         line 17 returns this solution. The other way it terminates is by returning “un-
         bounded” in line 11. In this case, for each iteration of the for loop in lines 5–8,
         when line 6 is executed, we ﬁnd that ai e  0. Consider the solution xN deﬁned as
                  1                  if i D e ;
         xN i D   0                   if i 2 N  feg ;
                      P
                  bi  j 2N aij xNj   if i 2 B :

         We now show that this solution is feasible, i.e., that all variables are nonneg-
         ative. The nonbasic variables other than xN e are 0, and xN e D 1 > 0; thus all
         nonbasic variables are nonnegative. For each basic variable xN i , we have
                       X
         xN i D bi       aij xNj
                        j 2N

              D bi  ai e xN e :
         The loop invariant implies that bi  0, and we have ai e  0 and xN e D 1 > 0.
         Thus, xN i  0.
         Now we show that the objective value for the solution xN is unbounded. From
         equation (29.42), the objective value is
                     X
         ´ D C          cj xNj
                       j 2N
             D  C ce xN e :
         Since ce > 0 (by line 4 of S IMPLEX) and xN e D 1, the objective value is 1,
         and thus the linear program is unbounded.

         It remains to show that S IMPLEX terminates, and when it does terminate, the
      solution it returns is optimal. Section 29.4 will address optimality. We now discuss
      termination.

      Termination
      In the example given in the beginning of this section, each iteration of the simplex
      algorithm increased the objective value associated with the basic solution. As Ex-
      ercise 29.3-2 asks you to show, no iteration of S IMPLEX can decrease the objective
      value associated with the basic solution. Unfortunately, it is possible that an itera-
      tion leaves the objective value unchanged. This phenomenon is called degeneracy,
      and we shall now study it in greater detail.
