           Problems for Chapter 22                                                          621


           22.5-6
           Given a directed graph G D .V; E/, explain how to create another graph G 0 D
           .V; E 0 / such that (a) G 0 has the same strongly connected components as G, (b) G 0
           has the same component graph as G, and (c) E 0 is as small as possible. Describe a
           fast algorithm to compute G 0 .

           22.5-7
           A directed graph G D .V; E/ is semiconnected if, for all pairs of vertices u;  2 V ,
           we have u ;  or  ; u. Give an efﬁcient algorithm to determine whether
           or not G is semiconnected. Prove that your algorithm is correct, and analyze its
           running time.



Problems

           22-1 Classifying edges by breadth-ﬁrst search
           A depth-ﬁrst forest classiﬁes the edges of a graph into tree, back, forward, and
           cross edges. A breadth-ﬁrst tree can also be used to classify the edges reachable
           from the source of the search into the same four categories.

           a. Prove that in a breadth-ﬁrst search of an undirected graph, the following prop-
              erties hold:
              1. There are no back edges and no forward edges.
              2. For each tree edge .u; /, we have :d D u:d C 1.
              3. For each cross edge .u; /, we have :d D u:d or :d D u:d C 1.

           b. Prove that in a breadth-ﬁrst search of a directed graph, the following properties
              hold:
              1. There are no forward edges.
              2. For each tree edge .u; /, we have :d D u:d C 1.
              3. For each cross edge .u; /, we have :d  u:d C 1.
              4. For each back edge .u; /, we have 0  :d  u:d.

           22-2 Articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components
           Let G D .V; E/ be a connected, undirected graph. An articulation point of G is
           a vertex whose removal disconnects G. A bridge of G is an edge whose removal
           disconnects G. A biconnected component of G is a maximal set of edges such
           that any two edges in the set lie on a common simple cycle. Figure 22.10 illustrates
