11.2 Hash tables                                                                       259


Section 11.3 discusses these issues, but for now we shall assume that any given
element is equally likely to hash into any of the m slots, independently of where
any other element has hashed to. We call this the assumption of simple uniform
hashing.
   For j D 0; 1; : : : ; m  1, let us denote the length of the list T Œj  by nj , so that
n D n0 C n1 C    C nm1 ;                                                        (11.1)
and the expected value of nj is E Œnj  D ˛ D n=m.
   We assume that O.1/ time sufﬁces to compute the hash value h.k/, so that
the time required to search for an element with key k depends linearly on the
length nh.k/ of the list T Œh.k/. Setting aside the O.1/ time required to compute
the hash function and to access slot h.k/, let us consider the expected number of
elements examined by the search algorithm, that is, the number of elements in the
list T Œh.k/ that the algorithm checks to see whether any have a key equal to k. We
shall consider two cases. In the ﬁrst, the search is unsuccessful: no element in the
table has key k. In the second, the search successfully ﬁnds an element with key k.

Theorem 11.1
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, an unsuccessful search
takes average-case time ‚.1C˛/, under the assumption of simple uniform hashing.


Proof Under the assumption of simple uniform hashing, any key k not already
stored in the table is equally likely to hash to any of the m slots. The expected time
to search unsuccessfully for a key k is the expected time to search to the end of
list T Œh.k/, which has expected length E Œnh.k/  D ˛. Thus, the expected number
of elements examined in an unsuccessful search is ˛, and the total time required
(including the time for computing h.k/) is ‚.1 C ˛/.

   The situation for a successful search is slightly different, since each list is not
equally likely to be searched. Instead, the probability that a list is searched is pro-
portional to the number of elements it contains. Nonetheless, the expected search
time still turns out to be ‚.1 C ˛/.

Theorem 11.2
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, a successful search
takes average-case time ‚.1C˛/, under the assumption of simple uniform hashing.


Proof We assume that the element being searched for is equally likely to be any
of the n elements stored in the table. The number of elements examined during a
successful search for an element x is one more than the number of elements that
