782   Chapter 27 Multithreaded Algorithms


         Instead, to keep our analysis simple, we shall investigate an on-line centralized
      scheduler, which knows the global state of the computation at any given time. In
      particular, we shall analyze greedy schedulers, which assign as many strands to
      processors as possible in each time step. If at least P strands are ready to execute
      during a time step, we say that the step is a complete step, and a greedy scheduler
      assigns any P of the ready strands to processors. Otherwise, fewer than P strands
      are ready to execute, in which case we say that the step is an incomplete step, and
      the scheduler assigns each ready strand to its own processor.
         From the work law, the best running time we can hope for on P processors
      is TP D T1 =P , and from the span law the best we can hope for is TP D T1 .
      The following theorem shows that greedy scheduling is provably good in that it
      achieves the sum of these two lower bounds as an upper bound.

      Theorem 27.1
      On an ideal parallel computer with P processors, a greedy scheduler executes a
      multithreaded computation with work T1 and span T1 in time
      TP  T1 =P C T1 :                                                             (27.4)

      Proof We start by considering the complete steps. In each complete step, the
      P processors together perform a total of P work. Suppose for the purpose of
      contradiction that the number of complete steps is strictly greater than bT1 =P c.
      Then, the total work of the complete steps is at least
      P  .bT1 =P c C 1/ D P bT1 =P c C P
                         D T1  .T1 mod P / C P          (by equation (3.8))
                         > T1                            (by inequality (3.9)) .
      Thus, we obtain the contradiction that the P processors would perform more work
      than the computation requires, which allows us to conclude that the number of
      complete steps is at most bT1 =P c.
         Now, consider an incomplete step. Let G be the dag representing the entire
      computation, and without loss of generality, assume that each strand takes unit
      time. (We can replace each longer strand by a chain of unit-time strands.) Let G 0
      be the subgraph of G that has yet to be executed at the start of the incomplete step,
      and let G 00 be the subgraph remaining to be executed after the incomplete step. A
      longest path in a dag must necessarily start at a vertex with in-degree 0. Since an
      incomplete step of a greedy scheduler executes all strands with in-degree 0 in G 0 ,
      the length of a longest path in G 00 must be 1 less than the length of a longest path
      in G 0 . In other words, an incomplete step decreases the span of the unexecuted dag
      by 1. Hence, the number of incomplete steps is at most T1 .
         Since each step is either complete or incomplete, the theorem follows.
