920        Chapter 30 Polynomials and the FFT


           I TERATIVE -FFT corresponds to a stage of butterﬂies shown in Figure 30.5. For
           s D 1; 2; : : : ; lg n, stage s consists of n=2s groups of butterﬂies (corresponding to
           each value of k in I TERATIVE -FFT), with 2s1 butterﬂies per group (corresponding
           to each value of j in I TERATIVE -FFT). The butterﬂies shown in Figure 30.5 corre-
           spond to the butterﬂy operations of the innermost loop (lines 9–12 of I TERATIVE -
           FFT). Note also that the twiddle factors used in the butterﬂies correspond to those
                                                              0    1            m=21
           used in I TERATIVE -FFT: in stage s, we use !m       ; !m ; : : : ; !m     , where m D 2s .

           Exercises

           30.3-1
           Show how I TERATIVE -FFT computes the DFT of the input vector .0; 2; 3; 1; 4;
           5; 7; 9/.

           30.3-2
           Show how to implement an FFT algorithm with the bit-reversal permutation occur-
           ring at the end, rather than at the beginning, of the computation. (Hint: Consider
           the inverse DFT.)

           30.3-3
           How many times does I TERATIVE -FFT compute twiddle factors in each stage?
           Rewrite I TERATIVE -FFT to compute twiddle factors only 2s1 times in stage s.

           30.3-4 ?
           Suppose that the adders within the butterﬂy operations of the FFT circuit some-
           times fail in such a manner that they always produce a zero output, independent
           of their inputs. Suppose that exactly one adder has failed, but that you don’t know
           which one. Describe how you can identify the failed adder by supplying inputs to
           the overall FFT circuit and observing the outputs. How efﬁcient is your method?



Problems

           30-1 Divide-and-conquer multiplication
           a. Show how to multiply two linear polynomials ax C b and cx C d using only
              three multiplications. (Hint: One of the multiplications is .a C b/  .c C d /.)

           b. Give two divide-and-conquer algorithms for multiplying two polynomials of
              degree-bound n in ‚.nlg 3 / time. The ﬁrst algorithm should divide the input
              polynomial coefﬁcients into a high half and a low half, and the second algorithm
              should divide them according to whether their index is odd or even.
