           20.3 The van Emde Boas tree                                                     545


           20.2-2
           Write pseudocode for P ROTO - V EB-D ELETE. It should update the appropriate
           summary bit by scanning the related bits within the cluster. What is the worst-
           case running time of your procedure?

           20.2-3
           Add the attribute n to each proto-vEB structure, giving the number of elements
           currently in the set it represents, and write pseudocode for P ROTO - V EB-D ELETE
           that uses the attribute n to decide when to reset summary bits to 0. What is the
           worst-case running time of your procedure? What other procedures need to change
           because of the new attribute? Do these changes affect their running times?

           20.2-4
           Modify the proto-vEB structure to support duplicate keys.

           20.2-5
           Modify the proto-vEB structure to support keys that have associated satellite data.

           20.2-6
           Write pseudocode for a procedure that creates a proto-EB.u/ structure.

           20.2-7
           Argue that if line 9 of P ROTO - V EB-M INIMUM is executed, then the proto-vEB
           structure is empty.

           20.2-8
           Suppose that we designed a proto-vEB structure in which each cluster array had
           only u1=4 elements. What would the running times of each operation be?



20.3 The van Emde Boas tree

           The proto-vEB structure of the previous section is close to what we need to achieve
           O.lg lg u/ running times. It falls short because we have to recurse too many times
           in most of the operations. In this section, we shall design a data structure that
           is similar to the proto-vEB structure but stores a little more information, thereby
           removing the need for some of the recursion.
              In Section 20.2, we observed that the assumption that we made about the uni-
                                    k
           verse size—that u D 22 for some integer k—is unduly restrictive, conﬁning the
           possible values of u an overly sparse set. From this point on, p  therefore, we will
           allow the universe size u to be any exact power of 2, and when u is not an inte-
