272   Chapter 11 Hash Tables


      Linear probing
      Given an ordinary hash function h0 W U ! f0; 1; : : : ; m  1g, which we refer to as
      an auxiliary hash function, the method of linear probing uses the hash function
      h.k; i/ D .h0 .k/ C i/ mod m
      for i D 0; 1; : : : ; m  1. Given key k, we ﬁrst probe T Œh0 .k/, i.e., the slot given
      by the auxiliary hash function. We next probe slot T Œh0 .k/ C 1, and so on up to
      slot T Œm  1. Then we wrap around to slots T Œ0; T Œ1; : : : until we ﬁnally probe
      slot T Œh0 .k/  1. Because the initial probe determines the entire probe sequence,
      there are only m distinct probe sequences.
         Linear probing is easy to implement, but it suffers from a problem known as
      primary clustering. Long runs of occupied slots build up, increasing the average
      search time. Clusters arise because an empty slot preceded by i full slots gets ﬁlled
      next with probability .i C 1/=m. Long runs of occupied slots tend to get longer,
      and the average search time increases.

      Quadratic probing
      Quadratic probing uses a hash function of the form
      h.k; i/ D .h0 .k/ C c1 i C c2 i 2 / mod m ;                                      (11.5)
      where h0 is an auxiliary hash function, c1 and c2 are positive auxiliary constants,
      and i D 0; 1; : : : ; m  1. The initial position probed is T Œh0 .k/; later positions
      probed are offset by amounts that depend in a quadratic manner on the probe num-
      ber i. This method works much better than linear probing, but to make full use of
      the hash table, the values of c1 , c2 , and m are constrained. Problem 11-3 shows
      one way to select these parameters. Also, if two keys have the same initial probe
      position, then their probe sequences are the same, since h.k1 ; 0/ D h.k2 ; 0/ im-
      plies h.k1 ; i/ D h.k2 ; i/. This property leads to a milder form of clustering, called
      secondary clustering. As in linear probing, the initial probe determines the entire
      sequence, and so only m distinct probe sequences are used.

      Double hashing
      Double hashing offers one of the best methods available for open addressing be-
      cause the permutations produced have many of the characteristics of randomly
      chosen permutations. Double hashing uses a hash function of the form
      h.k; i/ D .h1 .k/ C ih2 .k// mod m ;
      where both h1 and h2 are auxiliary hash functions. The initial probe goes to posi-
      tion T Œh1 .k/; successive probe positions are offset from previous positions by the
