564          Chapter 21 Data Structures for Disjoint Sets


             nected component. Figure 21.1(b) illustrates how C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS
             computes the disjoint sets.
                In an actual implementation of this connected-components algorithm, the repre-
             sentations of the graph and the disjoint-set data structure would need to reference
             each other. That is, an object representing a vertex would contain a pointer to
             the corresponding disjoint-set object, and vice versa. These programming details
             depend on the implementation language, and we do not address them further here.

             Exercises

             21.1-1
             Suppose that C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS is run on the undirected graph G D
             .V; E/, where V D fa; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; i; j; kg and the edges of E are pro-
             cessed in the order .d; i/; .f; k/; .g; i/; .b; g/; .a; h/; .i; j /; .d; k/; .b; j /; .d; f /;
             .g; j /; .a; e/. List the vertices in each connected component after each iteration of
             lines 3–5.

             21.1-2
             Show that after all edges are processed by C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS, two ver-
             tices are in the same connected component if and only if they are in the same set.

             21.1-3
             During the execution of C ONNECTED -C OMPONENTS on an undirected graph G D
             .V; E/ with k connected components, how many times is F IND -S ET called? How
             many times is U NION called? Express your answers in terms of jV j, jEj, and k.



21.2 Linked-list representation of disjoint sets

             Figure 21.2(a) shows a simple way to implement a disjoint-set data structure: each
             set is represented by its own linked list. The object for each set has attributes head,
             pointing to the ﬁrst object in the list, and tail, pointing to the last object. Each
             object in the list contains a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and
             a pointer back to the set object. Within each linked list, the objects may appear in
             any order. The representative is the set member in the ﬁrst object in the list.
                With this linked-list representation, both M AKE -S ET and F IND -S ET are easy,
             requiring O.1/ time. To carry out M AKE -S ET .x/, we create a new linked list
             whose only object is x. For F IND -S ET .x/, we just follow the pointer from x back
             to its set object and then return the member in the object that head points to. For
             example, in Figure 21.2(a), the call F IND -S ET .g/ would return f .
