       10.2 Linked lists                                                                                   239



(a)   L:nil


(b)   L:nil                           9              16               4              1



(c)   L:nil                           25              9              16              4               1



(d)   L:nil                           25              9              16              4



       Figure 10.4 A circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel. The sentinel L: nil appears between the
       head and tail. The attribute L: head is no longer needed, since we can access the head of the list
       by L: nil: next. (a) An empty list. (b) The linked list from Figure 10.3(a), with key 9 at the head and
       key 1 at the tail. (c) The list after executing L IST-I NSERT0 .L; x/, where x: key D 25. The new object
       becomes the head of the list. (d) The list after deleting the object with key 1. The new tail is the
       object with key 4.


       but has all the attributes of the other objects in the list. Wherever we have a ref-
       erence to NIL in list code, we replace it by a reference to the sentinel L:nil. As
       shown in Figure 10.4, this change turns a regular doubly linked list into a circu-
       lar, doubly linked list with a sentinel, in which the sentinel L:nil lies between the
       head and tail. The attribute L:nil:next points to the head of the list, and L:nil:pre
       points to the tail. Similarly, both the next attribute of the tail and the pre at-
       tribute of the head point to L:nil. Since L:nil:next points to the head, we can
       eliminate the attribute L:head altogether, replacing references to it by references
       to L:nil:next. Figure 10.4(a) shows that an empty list consists of just the sentinel,
       and both L:nil:next and L:nil:pre point to L:nil.
          The code for L IST-S EARCH remains the same as before, but with the references
       to NIL and L:head changed as speciﬁed above:

       L IST-S EARCH0 .L; k/
       1 x D L:nil:next
       2 while x ¤ L:nil and x:key ¤ k
       3        x D x:next
       4 return x

       We use the two-line procedure L IST-D ELETE 0 from before to delete an element
       from the list. The following procedure inserts an element into the list:
