           16.5 A task-scheduling problem as a matroid                                             443


           Exercises

           16.4-1
           Show that .S;  k / is a matroid, where S is any ﬁnite set and  k is the set of all
           subsets of S of size at most k, where k  jSj.

           16.4-2 ?
           Given an m n matrix T over some ﬁeld (such as the reals), show that .S;  / is a
           matroid, where S is the set of columns of T and A 2  if and only if the columns
           in A are linearly independent.

           16.4-3 ?
           Show that if .S;  / is a matroid, then .S;  0 / is a matroid, where
            0 D fA0 W S  A0 contains some maximal A 2  g :
           That is, the maximal independent sets of .S;  0 / are just the complements of the
           maximal independent sets of .S;  /.

           16.4-4 ?
           Let S be a ﬁnite set and let S1 ; S2 ; : : : ; Sk be a partition of S into nonempty disjoint
           subsets. Deﬁne the structure .S;  / by the condition that  D fA W jA \ Si j  1
           for i D 1; 2; : : : ; kg. Show that .S;  / is a matroid. That is, the set of all sets A
           that contain at most one member of each subset in the partition determines the
           independent sets of a matroid.

           16.4-5
           Show how to transform the weight function of a weighted matroid problem, where
           the desired optimal solution is a minimum-weight maximal independent subset, to
           make it a standard weighted-matroid problem. Argue carefully that your transfor-
           mation is correct.



? 16.5 A task-scheduling problem as a matroid

           An interesting problem that we can solve using matroids is the problem of op-
           timally scheduling unit-time tasks on a single processor, where each task has a
           deadline, along with a penalty paid if the task misses its deadline. The problem
           looks complicated, but we can solve it in a surprisingly simple manner by casting
           it as a matroid and using a greedy algorithm.
              A unit-time task is a job, such as a program to be run on a computer, that requires
           exactly one unit of time to complete. Given a ﬁnite set S of unit-time tasks, a
