24.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties                                          677


24.5-2
Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G D .V; E/ with weight function
w W E ! R and source vertex s such that G satisﬁes the following property: For
every edge .u; / 2 E, there is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s that contains .u; /
and another shortest-paths tree rooted at s that does not contain .u; /.

24.5-3
Embellish the proof of Lemma 24.10 to handle cases in which shortest-path
weights are 1 or 1.

24.5-4
Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s, and let G
be initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE .G; s/. Prove that if a sequence of
relaxation steps sets s: to a non-NIL value, then G contains a negative-weight
cycle.

24.5-5
Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight edges. Let
s 2 V be the source vertex, and suppose that we allow : to be the predecessor
of  on any shortest path to  from source s if  2 V  fsg is reachable from s,
and NIL otherwise. Give an example of such a graph G and an assignment of 
values that produces a cycle in G . (By Lemma 24.16, such an assignment cannot
be produced by a sequence of relaxation steps.)

24.5-6
Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w W E ! R
and no negative-weight cycles. Let s 2 V be the source vertex, and let G be initial-
ized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE .G; s/. Prove that for every vertex  2 V ,
there exists a path from s to  in G and that this property is maintained as an
invariant over any sequence of relaxations.

24.5-7
Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph that contains no negative-weight
cycles. Let s 2 V be the source vertex, and let G be initialized by I NITIALIZE -
S INGLE -S OURCE.G; s/. Prove that there exists a sequence of jV j  1 relaxation
steps that produces :d D ı.s; / for all  2 V .

24.5-8
Let G be an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight cycle reach-
able from the source vertex s. Show how to construct an inﬁnite sequence of relax-
ations of the edges of G such that every relaxation causes a shortest-path estimate
to change.
