556   Chapter 20 van Emde Boas Trees


      line 15 to occur, the test on line 14 must show that x’s cluster is empty. The only
      way that x’s cluster can be empty is if x was the only element in its cluster when
      we made the recursive call on line 13. But if x was the only element in its cluster,
      then that recursive call took O.1/ time, because it executed only lines 1–3. Thus,
      we have two mutually exclusive possibilities:
         The recursive call on line 13 took constant time.
         The recursive call on line 15 did not occur.
      In either case, recurrence (20.4) characterizes the running time of V EB-T REE -
      D ELETE, and hence its worst-case running time is O.lg lg u/.

      Exercises

      20.3-1
      Modify vEB trees to support duplicate keys.

      20.3-2
      Modify vEB trees to support keys that have associated satellite data.

      20.3-3
      Write pseudocode for a procedure that creates an empty van Emde Boas tree.

      20.3-4
      What happens if you call V EB-T REE -I NSERT with an element that is already in
      the vEB tree? What happens if you call V EB-T REE -D ELETE with an element that
      is not in the vEB tree? Explain why the procedures exhibit the behavior that they
      do. Show how to modify vEB trees and their operations so that we can check in
      constant time whether an element is present.

      20.3-5                  p                                     p
      Suppose that instead of " u clusters, each with universe size # u, we constructed
      vEB trees to have u1=k clusters, each with universe size u11=k , where k > 1 is a
      constant. If we were to modify the operations appropriately, what would be their
      running times? For the purpose of analysis, assume that u1=k and u11=k are always
      integers.

      20.3-6
      Creating a vEB tree with universe size u requires O.u/ time. Suppose we wish to
      explicitly account for that time. What is the smallest number of operations n for
      which the amortized time of each operation in a vEB tree is O.lg lg u/?
