6.3 Building a heap                                                                 157


a 1-element heap to begin with. The procedure B UILD -M AX -H EAP goes through
the remaining nodes of the tree and runs M AX -H EAPIFY on each one.

B UILD -M AX -H EAP .A/
1 A:heap-size D A:length
2 for i D bA:length=2c downto 1
3       M AX -H EAPIFY .A; i/

Figure 6.3 shows an example of the action of B UILD -M AX -H EAP.
   To show why B UILD -M AX -H EAP works correctly, we use the following loop
invariant:
   At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 2–3, each node i C 1;
   i C 2; : : : ; n is the root of a max-heap.
We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the ﬁrst loop iteration, that each
iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, and that the invariant provides a useful
property to show correctness when the loop terminates.
Initialization: Prior to the ﬁrst iteration of the loop, i D bn=2c. Each node
   bn=2c C 1; bn=2c C 2; : : : ; n is a leaf and is thus the root of a trivial max-heap.
Maintenance: To see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant, observe that
  the children of node i are numbered higher than i. By the loop invariant, there-
  fore, they are both roots of max-heaps. This is precisely the condition required
  for the call M AX -H EAPIFY .A; i/ to make node i a max-heap root. Moreover,
  the M AX -H EAPIFY call preserves the property that nodes i C 1; i C 2; : : : ; n
  are all roots of max-heaps. Decrementing i in the for loop update reestablishes
  the loop invariant for the next iteration.
Termination: At termination, i D 0. By the loop invariant, each node 1; 2; : : : ; n
   is the root of a max-heap. In particular, node 1 is.
   We can compute a simple upper bound on the running time of B UILD -M AX -
H EAP as follows. Each call to M AX -H EAPIFY costs O.lg n/ time, and B UILD -
M AX -H EAP makes O.n/ such calls. Thus, the running time is O.n lg n/. This
upper bound, though correct, is not asymptotically tight.
   We can derive a tighter bound by observing that the time for M AX -H EAPIFY to
run at a node varies with the height of the node in the tree, and the heights of most
nodes are small. Our tighter analysis relies on the properties
                                                     ˙        that an n-element heap
has height blg nc (see Exercise 6.1-2) and at most n=2hC1 nodes of any height h
(see Exercise 6.3-3).
   The time required by M AX -H EAPIFY when called on a node of height h is O.h/,
and so we can express the total cost of B UILD -M AX -H EAP as being bounded from
above by
