            24.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties                                        671




24.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties

            Throughout this chapter, our correctness arguments have relied on the triangle
            inequality, upper-bound property, no-path property, convergence property, path-
            relaxation property, and predecessor-subgraph property. We stated these properties
            without proof at the beginning of this chapter. In this section, we prove them.

            The triangle inequality
            In studying breadth-ﬁrst search (Section 22.2), we proved as Lemma 22.1 a sim-
            ple property of shortest distances in unweighted graphs. The triangle inequality
            generalizes the property to weighted graphs.

            Lemma 24.10 (Triangle inequality)
            Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w W E ! R
            and source vertex s. Then, for all edges .u; / 2 E, we have
            ı.s; /  ı.s; u/ C w.u; / :


            Proof Suppose that p is a shortest path from source s to vertex . Then p has
            no more weight than any other path from s to . Speciﬁcally, path p has no more
            weight than the particular path that takes a shortest path from source s to vertex u
            and then takes edge .u; /.
               Exercise 24.5-3 asks you to handle the case in which there is no shortest path
            from s to .

            Effects of relaxation on shortest-path estimates
            The next group of lemmas describes how shortest-path estimates are affected when
            we execute a sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of a weighted, directed
            graph that has been initialized by I NITIALIZE -S INGLE -S OURCE.

            Lemma 24.11 (Upper-bound property)
            Let G D .V; E/ be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w W E ! R.
            Let s 2 V be the source vertex, and let the graph be initialized by I NITIALIZE -
            S INGLE -S OURCE.G; s/. Then, :d  ı.s; / for all  2 V , and this invariant is
            maintained over any sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of G. Moreover,
            once :d achieves its lower bound ı.s; /, it never changes.
