            18.2 Basic operations on B-trees                                                   491


            18.1-3
            Show all legal B-trees of minimum degree 2 that represent f1; 2; 3; 4; 5g.

            18.1-4
            As a function of the minimum degree t, what is the maximum number of keys that
            can be stored in a B-tree of height h?

            18.1-5
            Describe the data structure that would result if each black node in a red-black tree
            were to absorb its red children, incorporating their children with its own.



18.2 Basic operations on B-trees

            In this section, we present the details of the operations B-T REE -S EARCH, B-
            T REE -C REATE, and B-T REE -I NSERT. In these procedures, we adopt two con-
            ventions:
               The root of the B-tree is always in main memory, so that we never need to
                perform a D ISK -R EAD on the root; we do have to perform a D ISK -W RITE of
                the root, however, whenever the root node is changed.
               Any nodes that are passed as parameters must already have had a D ISK -R EAD
                operation performed on them.
            The procedures we present are all “one-pass” algorithms that proceed downward
            from the root of the tree, without having to back up.

            Searching a B-tree
            Searching a B-tree is much like searching a binary search tree, except that instead
            of making a binary, or “two-way,” branching decision at each node, we make a
            multiway branching decision according to the number of the node’s children. More
            precisely, at each internal node x, we make an .x:n C 1/-way branching decision.
               B-T REE -S EARCH is a straightforward generalization of the T REE -S EARCH pro-
            cedure deﬁned for binary search trees. B-T REE -S EARCH takes as input a pointer
            to the root node x of a subtree and a key k to be searched for in that subtree. The
            top-level call is thus of the form B-T REE -S EARCH .T:root; k/. If k is in the B-tree,
            B-T REE -S EARCH returns the ordered pair .y; i/ consisting of a node y and an
            index i such that y:keyi D k. Otherwise, the procedure returns NIL.
