482   Part V Advanced Data Structures


      K EY operation takes constant amortized time, Fibonacci heaps are key components
      of some of the asymptotically fastest algorithms to date for graph problems.
         Noting that we can beat the .n lg n/ lower bound for sorting when the keys
      are integers in a restricted range, Chapter 20 asks whether we can design a data
      structure that supports the dynamic-set operations S EARCH, I NSERT, D ELETE,
      M INIMUM, M AXIMUM, S UCCESSOR, and P REDECESSOR in o.lg n/ time when
      the keys are integers in a restricted range. The answer turns out to be that we can,
      by using a recursive data structure known as a van Emde Boas tree. If the keys are
      unique integers drawn from the set f0; 1; 2; : : : ; u  1g, where u is an exact power
      of 2, then van Emde Boas trees support each of the above operations in O.lg lg u/
      time.
         Finally, Chapter 21 presents data structures for disjoint sets. We have a universe
      of n elements that are partitioned into dynamic sets. Initially, each element belongs
      to its own singleton set. The operation U NION unites two sets, and the query F IND -
      S ET identiﬁes the unique set that contains a given element at the moment. By
      representing each set as a simple rooted tree, we obtain surprisingly fast operations:
      a sequence of m operations runs in O.m ˛.n// time, where ˛.n/ is an incredibly
      slowly growing function—˛.n/ is at most 4 in any conceivable application. The
      amortized analysis that proves this time bound is as complex as the data structure
      is simple.
         The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of “advanced”
      data structures. Other advanced data structures include the following:
         Dynamic trees, introduced by Sleator and Tarjan [319] and discussed by Tarjan
          [330], maintain a forest of disjoint rooted trees. Each edge in each tree has
          a real-valued cost. Dynamic trees support queries to ﬁnd parents, roots, edge
          costs, and the minimum edge cost on a simple path from a node up to a root.
          Trees may be manipulated by cutting edges, updating all edge costs on a simple
          path from a node up to a root, linking a root into another tree, and making a
          node the root of the tree it appears in. One implementation of dynamic trees
          gives an O.lg n/ amortized time bound for each operation; a more complicated
          implementation yields O.lg n/ worst-case time bounds. Dynamic trees are used
          in some of the asymptotically fastest network-ﬂow algorithms.
         Splay trees, developed by Sleator and Tarjan [320] and, again, discussed by
          Tarjan [330], are a form of binary search tree on which the standard search-
          tree operations run in O.lg n/ amortized time. One application of splay trees
          simpliﬁes dynamic trees.
         Persistent data structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as well, on past
          versions of a data structure. Driscoll, Sarnak, Sleator, and Tarjan [97] present
          techniques for making linked data structures persistent with only a small time
