638        Chapter 23 Minimum Spanning Trees


           by at most 1. Let E1 be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices in V1 , and
           let E2 be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices in V2 . Recursively solve
           a minimum-spanning-tree problem on each of the two subgraphs G1 D .V1 ; E1 /
           and G2 D .V2 ; E2 /. Finally, select the minimum-weight edge in E that crosses the
           cut .V1 ; V2 /, and use this edge to unite the resulting two minimum spanning trees
           into a single spanning tree.
              Either argue that the algorithm correctly computes a minimum spanning tree
           of G, or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.



Problems

           23-1 Second-best minimum spanning tree
           Let G D .V; E/ be an undirected, connected graph whose weight function is
           w W E ! R, and suppose that jEj  jV j and all edge weights are distinct.
             We deﬁne a second-best minimum spanning tree as follows. Let T be the set
           of all spanning trees of G, and let T 0 be a minimum spanning tree of G. Then
           a second-best minimum spanning tree is a spanning tree T such that w.T / D
           minT 00 2T fT 0 g fw.T 00 /g.
           a. Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the second-best mini-
              mum spanning tree need not be unique.

           b. Let T be the minimum spanning tree of G. Prove that G contains edges
              .u; / 2 T and .x; y/ 62 T such that T  f.u; /g [ f.x; y/g is a second-best
              minimum spanning tree of G.

           c. Let T be a spanning tree of G and, for any two vertices u;  2 V , let maxŒu; 
              denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique simple path between u and 
              in T . Describe an O.V 2 /-time algorithm that, given T , computes maxŒu;  for
              all u;  2 V .

           d. Give an efﬁcient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum spanning tree
              of G.

           23-2 Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs
           For a very sparse connected graph G D .V; E/, we can further improve upon the
           O.E C V lg V / running time of Prim’s algorithm with Fibonacci heaps by prepro-
           cessing G to decrease the number of vertices before running Prim’s algorithm. In
           particular, we choose, for each vertex u, the minimum-weight edge .u; / incident
           on u, and we put .u; / into the minimum spanning tree under construction. We
