15.4 Longest common subsequence                                                               391


bases, where the possible bases are adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine.
Representing each of these bases by its initial letter, we can express a strand
of DNA as a string over the ﬁnite set fA; C; G; Tg. (See Appendix C for
the deﬁnition of a string.) For example, the DNA of one organism may be
S1 D ACCGGTCGAGTGCGCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA, and the DNA of another organ-
ism may be S2 D GTCGTTCGGAATGCCGTTGCTCTGTAAA. One reason to com-
pare two strands of DNA is to determine how “similar” the two strands are, as some
measure of how closely related the two organisms are. We can, and do, deﬁne sim-
ilarity in many different ways. For example, we can say that two DNA strands are
similar if one is a substring of the other. (Chapter 32 explores algorithms to solve
this problem.) In our example, neither S1 nor S2 is a substring of the other. Alter-
natively, we could say that two strands are similar if the number of changes needed
to turn one into the other is small. (Problem 15-5 looks at this notion.) Yet another
way to measure the similarity of strands S1 and S2 is by ﬁnding a third strand S3
in which the bases in S3 appear in each of S1 and S2 ; these bases must appear
in the same order, but not necessarily consecutively. The longer the strand S3 we
can ﬁnd, the more similar S1 and S2 are. In our example, the longest strand S3 is
GTCGTCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA.
   We formalize this last notion of similarity as the longest-common-subsequence
problem. A subsequence of a given sequence is just the given sequence with zero or
more elements left out. Formally, given a sequence X D hx1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xm i, another
sequence Z D h´1 ; ´2 ; : : : ; ´k i is a subsequence of X if there exists a strictly
increasing sequence hi1 ; i2 ; : : : ; ik i of indices of X such that for all j D 1; 2; : : : ; k,
we have xij D ´j . For example, Z D hB; C; D; Bi is a subsequence of X D
hA; B; C; B; D; A; Bi with corresponding index sequence h2; 3; 5; 7i.
   Given two sequences X and Y , we say that a sequence Z is a common sub-
sequence of X and Y if Z is a subsequence of both X and Y . For example, if
X D hA; B; C; B; D; A; Bi and Y D hB; D; C; A; B; Ai, the sequence hB; C; Ai is
a common subsequence of both X and Y . The sequence hB; C; Ai is not a longest
common subsequence (LCS) of X and Y , however, since it has length 3 and the
sequence hB; C; B; Ai, which is also common to both X and Y , has length 4. The
sequence hB; C; B; Ai is an LCS of X and Y , as is the sequence hB; D; A; Bi,
since X and Y have no common subsequence of length 5 or greater.
   In the longest-common-subsequence problem, we are given two sequences
X D hx1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xm i and Y D hy1 ; y2 ; : : : ; yn i and wish to ﬁnd a maximum-
length common subsequence of X and Y . This section shows how to efﬁciently
solve the LCS problem using dynamic programming.
