1168        Appendix B   Sets, Etc.


            For example, the inverse of the function f .n/ D .1/n dn=2e is
                       (
                         2m          if m  0 ;
            f 1 .m/ D
                         2m  1 if m < 0 :

            Exercises

            B.3-1
            Let A and B be ﬁnite sets, and let f W A ! B be a function. Show that
            a. if f is injective, then jAj  jBj;
            b. if f is surjective, then jAj  jBj.

            B.3-2
            Is the function f .x/ D x C 1 bijective when the domain and the codomain are N?
            Is it bijective when the domain and the codomain are Z?

            B.3-3
            Give a natural deﬁnition for the inverse of a binary relation such that if a relation
            is in fact a bijective function, its relational inverse is its functional inverse.

            B.3-4 ?
            Give a bijection from Z to Z     Z.



B.4    Graphs

            This section presents two kinds of graphs: directed and undirected. Certain def-
            initions in the literature differ from those given here, but for the most part, the
            differences are slight. Section 22.1 shows how we can represent graphs in com-
            puter memory.
               A directed graph (or digraph) G is a pair .V; E/, where V is a ﬁnite set and E
            is a binary relation on V . The set V is called the vertex set of G, and its elements
            are called vertices (singular: vertex). The set E is called the edge set of G, and its
            elements are called edges. Figure B.2(a) is a pictorial representation of a directed
            graph on the vertex set f1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6g. Vertices are represented by circles in the
            ﬁgure, and edges are represented by arrows. Note that self-loops—edges from a
            vertex to itself—are possible.
               In an undirected graph G D .V; E/, the edge set E consists of unordered
            pairs of vertices, rather than ordered pairs. That is, an edge is a set fu; g, where
