1112   Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms

                 X
       c.A/ D             c.u; / :
                .u;/2A

          In many practical situations, the least costly way to go from a place u to a place w
       is to go directly, with no intermediate steps. Put another way, cutting out an inter-
       mediate stop never increases the cost. We formalize this notion by saying that the
       cost function c satisﬁes the triangle inequality if, for all vertices u; ; w 2 V ,
       c.u; w/  c.u; / C c.; w/ :
          The triangle inequality seems as though it should naturally hold, and it is au-
       tomatically satisﬁed in several applications. For example, if the vertices of the
       graph are points in the plane and the cost of traveling between two vertices is the
       ordinary euclidean distance between them, then the triangle inequality is satisﬁed.
       Furthermore, many cost functions other than euclidean distance satisfy the triangle
       inequality.
          As Exercise 35.2-2 shows, the traveling-salesman problem is NP-complete even
       if we require that the cost function satisfy the triangle inequality. Thus, we should
       not expect to ﬁnd a polynomial-time algorithm for solving this problem exactly.
       Instead, we look for good approximation algorithms.
          In Section 35.2.1, we examine a 2-approximation algorithm for the traveling-
       salesman problem with the triangle inequality. In Section 35.2.2, we show that
       without the triangle inequality, a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with a
       constant approximation ratio does not exist unless P D NP.

       35.2.1   The traveling-salesman problem with the triangle inequality
       Applying the methodology of the previous section, we shall ﬁrst compute a struc-
       ture—a minimum spanning tree—whose weight gives a lower bound on the length
       of an optimal traveling-salesman tour. We shall then use the minimum spanning
       tree to create a tour whose cost is no more than twice that of the minimum spanning
       tree’s weight, as long as the cost function satisﬁes the triangle inequality. The fol-
       lowing algorithm implements this approach, calling the minimum-spanning-tree
       algorithm MST-P RIM from Section 23.2 as a subroutine. The parameter G is a
       complete undirected graph, and the cost function c satisﬁes the triangle inequality.

       A PPROX -TSP-T OUR .G; c/
       1 select a vertex r 2 G:V to be a “root” vertex
       2 compute a minimum spanning tree T for G from root r
              using MST-P RIM.G; c; r/
       3 let H be a list of vertices, ordered according to when they are ﬁrst visited
              in a preorder tree walk of T
       4 return the hamiltonian cycle H
