28.1 Solving systems of linear equations                                     815


problem of ﬁnding good approximate solutions to overdetermined systems of linear
equations.
   Let us return to our problem of solving the system Ax D b of n equations in n
unknowns. We could compute A1 and then, using equation (28.3), multiply b
by A1 , yielding x D A1 b. This approach suffers in practice from numerical
instability. Fortunately, another approach—LUP decomposition—is numerically
stable and has the further advantage of being faster in practice.

Overview of LUP decomposition
The idea behind LUP decomposition is to ﬁnd three n     n matrices L, U , and P
such that
PA D LU ;                                                                  (28.4)
where
   L is a unit lower-triangular matrix,
   U is an upper-triangular matrix, and
   P is a permutation matrix.
We call matrices L, U , and P satisfying equation (28.4) an LUP decomposition
of the matrix A. We shall show that every nonsingular matrix A possesses such a
decomposition.
   Computing an LUP decomposition for the matrix A has the advantage that we
can more easily solve linear systems when they are triangular, as is the case for
both matrices L and U . Once we have found an LUP decomposition for A, we
can solve equation (28.2), Ax D b, by solving only triangular linear systems, as
follows. Multiplying both sides of Ax D b by P yields the equivalent equation
PAx D P b, which, by Exercise D.1-4, amounts to permuting the equations (28.1).
Using our decomposition (28.4), we obtain
LUx D P b :
We can now solve this equation by solving two triangular linear systems. Let us
deﬁne y D Ux, where x is the desired solution vector. First, we solve the lower-
triangular system
Ly D P b                                                                   (28.5)
for the unknown vector y by a method called “forward substitution.” Having solved
for y, we then solve the upper-triangular system
Ux D y                                                                     (28.6)
