1074   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


       tion is to be executed next. The program counter automatically increments upon
       fetching each instruction, thereby causing the computer to execute instructions se-
       quentially. The execution of an instruction can cause a value to be written to the
       program counter, however, which alters the normal sequential execution and allows
       the computer to loop and perform conditional branches.
          At any point during the execution of a program, the computer’s memory holds
       the entire state of the computation. (We take the memory to include the program
       itself, the program counter, working storage, and any of the various bits of state
       that a computer maintains for bookkeeping.) We call any particular state of com-
       puter memory a conﬁguration. We can view the execution of an instruction as
       mapping one conﬁguration to another. The computer hardware that accomplishes
       this mapping can be implemented as a boolean combinational circuit, which we
       denote by M in the proof of the following lemma.

       Lemma 34.6
       The circuit-satisﬁability problem is NP-hard.

       Proof Let L be any language in NP. We shall describe a polynomial-time algo-
       rithm F computing a reduction function f that maps every binary string x to a
       circuit C D f .x/ such that x 2 L if and only if C 2 CIRCUIT-SAT.
          Since L 2 NP, there must exist an algorithm A that veriﬁes L in polynomial
       time. The algorithm F that we shall construct uses the two-input algorithm A to
       compute the reduction function f .
          Let T .n/ denote the worst-case running time of algorithm A on length-n input
       strings, and let k  1 be a constant such that T .n/ D O.nk / and the length of the
       certiﬁcate is O.nk /. (The running time of A is actually a polynomial in the total
       input size, which includes both an input string and a certiﬁcate, but since the length
       of the certiﬁcate is polynomial in the length n of the input string, the running time
       is polynomial in n.)
          The basic idea of the proof is to represent the computation of A as a sequence
       of conﬁgurations. As Figure 34.9 illustrates, we can break each conﬁguration into
       parts consisting of the program for A, the program counter and auxiliary machine
       state, the input x, the certiﬁcate y, and working storage. The combinational cir-
       cuit M , which implements the computer hardware, maps each conﬁguration ci to
       the next conﬁguration ci C1 , starting from the initial conﬁguration c0 . Algorithm A
       writes its output—0 or 1—to some designated location by the time it ﬁnishes ex-
       ecuting, and if we assume that thereafter A halts, the value never changes. Thus,
       if the algorithm runs for at most T .n/ steps, the output appears as one of the bits
       in cT .n/ .
          The reduction algorithm F constructs a single combinational circuit that com-
       putes all conﬁgurations produced by a given initial conﬁguration. The idea is to
