870   Chapter 29 Linear Programming


      sets of nonbasic and basic variables. Line 21 returns the new slack form. As given,
      if ale D 0, P IVOT would cause an error by dividing by 0, but as we shall see in the
      proofs of Lemmas 29.2 and 29.12, we call P IVOT only when ale ¤ 0.
         We now summarize the effect that P IVOT has on the values of the variables in
      the basic solution.

      Lemma 29.1
      Consider a call to P IVOT .N; B; A; b; c; ; l; e/ in which ale ¤ 0. Let the values
      returned from the call be .Ny ; B;
                                      y A; y cy; y/, and let xN denote the basic solution after
                                         y b;
      the call. Then
      1. xNj D 0 for each j 2 Ny .
      2. xN e D bl =ale .
      3. xN i D bi  ai e bye for each i 2 By  feg.

      Proof The ﬁrst statement is true because the basic solution always sets all non-
      basic variables to 0. When we set each nonbasic variable to 0 in a constraint
                 X
      xi D byi      ayij xj ;
                     y
                  j 2N

      we have that xN i D byi for each i 2 y
                                           B. Since e 2 y
                                                        B, line 3 of P IVOT gives
      xN e D bye D bl =ale ;
      which proves the second statement. Similarly, using line 9 for each i 2 By  feg,
      we have
      xN i D byi D bi  ai e bye ;
      which proves the third statement.

      The formal simplex algorithm
      We are now ready to formalize the simplex algorithm, which we demonstrated by
      example. That example was a particularly nice one, and we could have had several
      other issues to address:
         How do we determine whether a linear program is feasible?
         What do we do if the linear program is feasible, but the initial basic solution is
          not feasible?
         How do we determine whether a linear program is unbounded?
         How do we choose the entering and leaving variables?
