xviii   Preface


        Web site
        You can use our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, to obtain supple-
        mentary information and to communicate with us. The Web site links to a list of
        known errors, solutions to selected exercises and problems, and (of course) a list
        explaining the corny professor jokes, as well as other content that we might add.
        The Web site also tells you how to report errors or make suggestions.

        How we produced this book
        Like the second edition, the third edition was produced in LATEX 2" . We used the
        Times font with mathematics typeset using the MathTime Pro 2 fonts. We thank
        Michael Spivak from Publish or Perish, Inc., Lance Carnes from Personal TeX,
        Inc., and Tim Tregubov from Dartmouth College for technical support. As in the
        previous two editions, we compiled the index using Windex, a C program that we
        wrote, and the bibliography was produced with B IBTEX. The PDF ﬁles for this
        book were created on a MacBook running OS 10.5.
           We drew the illustrations for the third edition using MacDraw Pro, with some
        of the mathematical expressions in illustrations laid in with the psfrag package
        for LATEX 2" . Unfortunately, MacDraw Pro is legacy software, having not been
        marketed for over a decade now. Happily, we still have a couple of Macintoshes
        that can run the Classic environment under OS 10.4, and hence they can run Mac-
        Draw Pro—mostly. Even under the Classic environment, we ﬁnd MacDraw Pro to
        be far easier to use than any other drawing software for the types of illustrations
        that accompany computer-science text, and it produces beautiful output.1 Who
        knows how long our pre-Intel Macs will continue to run, so if anyone from Apple
        is listening: Please create an OS X-compatible version of MacDraw Pro!

        Acknowledgments for the third edition
        We have been working with the MIT Press for over two decades now, and what a
        terriﬁc relationship it has been! We thank Ellen Faran, Bob Prior, Ada Brunstein,
        and Mary Reilly for their help and support.
           We were geographically distributed while producing the third edition, working
        in the Dartmouth College Department of Computer Science, the MIT Computer


        1 We investigated several drawing programs that run under Mac OS X, but all had signiﬁcant short-

        comings compared with MacDraw Pro. We brieﬂy attempted to produce the illustrations for this
        book with a different, well known drawing program. We found that it took at least ﬁve times as long
        to produce each illustration as it took with MacDraw Pro, and the resulting illustrations did not look
        as good. Hence the decision to revert to MacDraw Pro running on older Macintoshes.
