852   Chapter 29 Linear Programming


      Converting linear programs into standard form
      It is always possible to convert a linear program, given as minimizing or maxi-
      mizing a linear function subject to linear constraints, into standard form. A linear
      program might not be in standard form for any of four possible reasons:
      1. The objective function might be a minimization rather than a maximization.
      2. There might be variables without nonnegativity constraints.
      3. There might be equality constraints, which have an equal sign rather than a
         less-than-or-equal-to sign.
      4. There might be inequality constraints, but instead of having a less-than-or-
         equal-to sign, they have a greater-than-or-equal-to sign.
         When converting one linear program L into another linear program L0 , we would
      like the property that an optimal solution to L0 yields an optimal solution to L. To
      capture this idea, we say that two maximization linear programs L and L0 are
      equivalent if for each feasible solution xN to L with objective value ´, there is
      a corresponding feasible solution xN 0 to L0 with objective value ´, and for each
      feasible solution xN 0 to L0 with objective value ´, there is a corresponding feasible
      solution xN to L with objective value ´. (This deﬁnition does not imply a one-to-
      one correspondence between feasible solutions.) A minimization linear program L
      and a maximization linear program L0 are equivalent if for each feasible solution xN
      to L with objective value ´, there is a corresponding feasible solution xN 0 to L0 with
      objective value ´, and for each feasible solution xN 0 to L0 with objective value ´,
      there is a corresponding feasible solution xN to L with objective value ´.
         We now show how to remove, one by one, each of the possible problems in the
      list above. After removing each one, we shall argue that the new linear program is
      equivalent to the old one.
         To convert a minimization linear program L into an equivalent maximization lin-
      ear program L0 , we simply negate the coefﬁcients in the objective function. Since
      L and L0 have identical sets of feasible solutions and, for any feasible solution, the
      objective value in L is the negative of the objective value in L0 , these two linear
      programs are equivalent. For example, if we have the linear program
      minimize     2x1 C 3x2
      subject to
                      x1 C x2          D 7
                      x1  2x2          4
                      x1                0 ;
      and we negate the coefﬁcients of the objective function, we obtain
