528   Chapter 19 Fibonacci Heaps




      (a)
                                            Bk–1
                                Bk–1
               B0                      Bk                                               depth
                                                                                          0
                                                                                          1
      (b)                                                                                 2
                                                                                          3
                                                                                          4
               B0          B1    B2                B3                   B4




      (c)
                                                                   B0

                                                             B1
                                                        B2
                    Bk–1        Bk–2

                                             Bk


      Figure 19.6 (a) The recursive deﬁnition of the binomial tree Bk . Triangles represent rooted sub-
      trees. (b) The binomial trees B0 through B4 . Node depths in B4 are shown. (c) Another way of
      looking at the binomial tree Bk .


         Suppose that we represent a binomial heap as follows. The left-child, right-
      sibling scheme of Section 10.4 represents each binomial tree within a binomial
      heap. Each node contains its key; pointers to its parent, to its leftmost child, and
      to the sibling immediately to its right (these pointers are NIL when appropriate);
      and its degree (as in Fibonacci heaps, how many children it has). The roots form a
      singly linked root list, ordered by the degrees of the roots (from low to high), and
      we access the binomial heap by a pointer to the ﬁrst node on the root list.

      c. Complete the description of how to represent a binomial heap (i.e., name the
         attributes, describe when attributes have the value NIL, and deﬁne how the root
         list is organized), and show how to implement the same seven operations on
         binomial heaps as this chapter implemented on Fibonacci heaps. Each opera-
         tion should run in O.lg n/ worst-case time, where n is the number of nodes in
