796   Chapter 27 Multithreaded Algorithms


      3. Using the submatrices created in step 1 and the 10 matrices created in
         step 2, recursively spawn the computation of seven n=2 n=2 matrix products
         P1 ; P2 ; : : : ; P7 .
      4. Compute the desired submatrices C11 ; C12 ; C21 ; C22 of the result matrix C by
         adding and subtracting various combinations of the Pi matrices, once again
         using doubly nested parallel for loops. We can compute all four submatrices
         with ‚.n2 / work and ‚.lg n/ span.
         To analyze this algorithm, we ﬁrst observe that since the serialization is the
      same as the original serial algorithm, the work is just the running time of the
      serialization, namely, ‚.nlg 7 /. As for P-M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY-R ECURSIVE, we
      can devise a recurrence for the span. In this case, seven recursive calls exe-
      cute in parallel, but since they all operate on matrices of the same size, we ob-
      tain the same recurrence (27.7) as we did for P-M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY-R ECURSIVE,
      which has solution ‚.lg2 n/. Thus, the parallelism of multithreaded Strassen’s
      method is ‚.nlg 7 = lg2 n/, which is high, though slightly less than the parallelism
      of P-M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY-R ECURSIVE .

      Exercises

      27.2-1
      Draw the computation dag for computing P-S QUARE -M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY on 2 2
      matrices, labeling how the vertices in your diagram correspond to strands in the
      execution of the algorithm. Use the convention that spawn and call edges point
      downward, continuation edges point horizontally to the right, and return edges
      point upward. Assuming that each strand takes unit time, analyze the work, span,
      and parallelism of this computation.

      27.2-2
      Repeat Exercise 27.2-1 for P-M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY-R ECURSIVE.

      27.2-3
      Give pseudocode for a multithreaded algorithm that multiplies two n      n matrices
      with work ‚.n3 / but span only ‚.lg n/. Analyze your algorithm.

      27.2-4
      Give pseudocode for an efﬁcient multithreaded algorithm that multiplies a p q
      matrix by a q r matrix. Your algorithm should be highly parallel even if any of
      p, q, and r are 1. Analyze your algorithm.
