336       Chapter 13 Red-Black Trees


                           15                                                          15


               9                     18                                    9                     18


      3               12                       25                  3              12                       25


           6                              21                           6                              21
                           (a)                                                         (b)


          Figure 13.11 Spines of a binary search tree. The left spine is shaded in (a), and the right spine is
          shaded in (b).


          c. Explain how T REAP -I NSERT works. Explain the idea in English and give pseu-
             docode. (Hint: Execute the usual binary-search-tree insertion procedure and
             then perform rotations to restore the min-heap order property.)

          d. Show that the expected running time of T REAP -I NSERT is ‚.lg n/.

          T REAP -I NSERT performs a search and then a sequence of rotations. Although
          these two operations have the same expected running time, they have different
          costs in practice. A search reads information from the treap without modifying it.
          In contrast, a rotation changes parent and child pointers within the treap. On most
          computers, read operations are much faster than write operations. Thus we would
          like T REAP -I NSERT to perform few rotations. We will show that the expected
          number of rotations performed is bounded by a constant.
             In order to do so, we will need some deﬁnitions, which Figure 13.11 depicts.
          The left spine of a binary search tree T is the simple path from the root to the node
          with the smallest key. In other words, the left spine is the simple path from the
          root that consists of only left edges. Symmetrically, the right spine of T is the
          simple path from the root consisting of only right edges. The length of a spine is
          the number of nodes it contains.

          e. Consider the treap T immediately after T REAP -I NSERT has inserted node x.
             Let C be the length of the right spine of the left subtree of x. Let D be the
             length of the left spine of the right subtree of x. Prove that the total number of
             rotations that were performed during the insertion of x is equal to C C D.

          We will now calculate the expected values of C and D. Without loss of generality,
          we assume that the keys are 1; 2; : : : ; n, since we are comparing them only to one
          another.
