464   Chapter 17 Amortized Analysis


      the unused space in the table is never more than a constant fraction of the total
      amount of space.
         We start by analyzing a dynamic table in which we only insert items. We then
      consider the more general case in which we both insert and delete items.

      17.4.1     Table expansion
      Let us assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots. A table ﬁlls
      up when all slots have been used or, equivalently, when its load factor is 1.1 In some
      software environments, upon attempting to insert an item into a full table, the only
      alternative is to abort with an error. We shall assume, however, that our software
      environment, like many modern ones, provides a memory-management system that
      can allocate and free blocks of storage on request. Thus, upon inserting an item
      into a full table, we can expand the table by allocating a new table with more slots
      than the old table had. Because we always need the table to reside in contiguous
      memory, we must allocate a new array for the larger table and then copy items from
      the old table into the new table.
         A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as the old
      one. If the only table operations are insertions, then the load factor of the table is
      always at least 1=2, and thus the amount of wasted space never exceeds half the
      total space in the table.
         In the following pseudocode, we assume that T is an object representing the
      table. The attribute T:table contains a pointer to the block of storage representing
      the table, T:num contains the number of items in the table, and T:size gives the total
      number of slots in the table. Initially, the table is empty: T:num D T:size D 0.
      TABLE -I NSERT .T; x/
       1 if T:size == 0
       2       allocate T:table with 1 slot
       3       T:size D 1
       4 if T:num == T:size
       5       allocate new-table with 2  T:size slots
       6       insert all items in T:table into new-table
       7       free T:table
       8       T:table D new-table
       9       T:size D 2  T:size
      10 insert x into T:table
      11 T:num D T:num C 1


      1 In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, we may wish to consider a table to be full if

      its load factor equals some constant strictly less than 1. (See Exercise 17.4-1.)
