1030   Chapter 33 Computational Geometry


       point in Q. Both algorithms exploit this property, deciding which vertices in Q to
       keep as vertices of the convex hull and which vertices in Q to reject.
         We can compute convex hulls in O.n lg n/ time by any one of several methods.
       Both Graham’s scan and Jarvis’s march use a technique called “rotational sweep,”
       processing vertices in the order of the polar angles they form with a reference
       vertex. Other methods include the following:
          In the incremental method, we ﬁrst sort the points from left to right, yielding a
           sequence hp1 ; p2 ; : : : ; pn i. At the ith stage, we update the convex hull of the
           i  1 leftmost points, CH.fp1 ; p2 ; : : : ; pi 1 g/, according to the ith point from
           the left, thus forming CH.fp1 ; p2 ; : : : ; pi g/. Exercise 33.3-6 asks you how to
           implement this method to take a total of O.n lg n/ time.
          In the divide-and-conquer method, we divide the set of n points in ‚.n/ time
           into two subsets, one containing the leftmost dn=2e points and one containing
           the rightmost bn=2c points, recursively compute the convex hulls of the subsets,
           and then, by means of a clever method, combine the hulls in O.n/ time. The
           running time is described by the familiar recurrence T .n/ D 2T .n=2/ C O.n/,
           and so the divide-and-conquer method runs in O.n lg n/ time.
          The prune-and-search method is similar to the worst-case linear-time median
           algorithm of Section 9.3. With this method, we ﬁnd the upper portion (or “upper
           chain”) of the convex hull by repeatedly throwing out a constant fraction of the
           remaining points until only the upper chain of the convex hull remains. We then
           do the same for the lower chain. This method is asymptotically the fastest: if
           the convex hull contains h vertices, it runs in only O.n lg h/ time.
          Computing the convex hull of a set of points is an interesting problem in its own
       right. Moreover, algorithms for some other computational-geometry problems start
       by computing a convex hull. Consider, for example, the two-dimensional farthest-
       pair problem: we are given a set of n points in the plane and wish to ﬁnd the
       two points whose distance from each other is maximum. As Exercise 33.3-3 asks
       you to prove, these two points must be vertices of the convex hull. Although we
       won’t prove it here, we can ﬁnd the farthest pair of vertices of an n-vertex convex
       polygon in O.n/ time. Thus, by computing the convex hull of the n input points
       in O.n lg n/ time and then ﬁnding the farthest pair of the resulting convex-polygon
       vertices, we can ﬁnd the farthest pair of points in any set of n points in O.n lg n/
       time.

       Graham’s scan
       Graham’s scan solves the convex-hull problem by maintaining a stack S of can-
       didate points. It pushes each point of the input set Q onto the stack one time,
