           25.2 The Floyd-Warshall algorithm                                                         693


           25.1-10
           Give an efﬁcient algorithm to ﬁnd the length (number of edges) of a minimum-
           length negative-weight cycle in a graph.



25.2 The Floyd-Warshall algorithm

           In this section, we shall use a different dynamic-programming formulation to solve
           the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on a directed graph G D .V; E/. The result-
           ing algorithm, known as the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, runs in ‚.V 3 / time. As
           before, negative-weight edges may be present, but we assume that there are no
           negative-weight cycles. As in Section 25.1, we follow the dynamic-programming
           process to develop the algorithm. After studying the resulting algorithm, we
           present a similar method for ﬁnding the transitive closure of a directed graph.

           The structure of a shortest path
           In the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, we characterize the structure of a shortest path
           differently from how we characterized it in Section 25.1. The Floyd-Warshall algo-
           rithm considers the intermediate vertices of a shortest path, where an intermediate
           vertex of a simple path p D h1 ; 2 ; : : : ; l i is any vertex of p other than 1 or l ,
           that is, any vertex in the set f2 ; 3 ; : : : ; l1 g.
              The Floyd-Warshall algorithm relies on the following observation. Under our
           assumption that the vertices of G are V D f1; 2; : : : ; ng, let us consider a subset
           f1; 2; : : : ; kg of vertices for some k. For any pair of vertices i; j 2 V , consider all
           paths from i to j whose intermediate vertices are all drawn from f1; 2; : : : ; kg, and
           let p be a minimum-weight path from among them. (Path p is simple.) The Floyd-
           Warshall algorithm exploits a relationship between path p and shortest paths from i
           to j with all intermediate vertices in the set f1; 2; : : : ; k  1g. The relationship
           depends on whether or not k is an intermediate vertex of path p.
              If k is not an intermediate vertex of path p, then all intermediate vertices of
               path p are in the set f1; 2; : : : ; k  1g. Thus, a shortest path from vertex i
               to vertex j with all intermediate vertices in the set f1; 2; : : : ; k  1g is also a
               shortest path from i to j with all intermediate vertices in the set f1; 2; : : : ; kg.
                                                                                           p     p
              If k is an intermediate vertex of path p, then we decompose p into i ;1 k ;2 j ,
               as Figure 25.3 illustrates. By Lemma 24.1, p1 is a shortest path from i to k
               with all intermediate vertices in the set f1; 2; : : : ; kg. In fact, we can make a
               slightly stronger statement. Because vertex k is not an intermediate vertex of
               path p1 , all intermediate vertices of p1 are in the set f1; 2; : : : ; k  1g. There-
