           31.1 Elementary number-theoretic notions                                                   927


           we shall measure the size of an input in terms of the number of bits required to
           represent that input, not just the number of integers in the input. An algorithm
           with integer inputs a1 ; a2 ; : : : ; ak is a polynomial-time algorithm if it runs in time
           polynomial in lg a1 ; lg a2 ; : : : ; lg ak , that is, polynomial in the lengths of its binary-
           encoded inputs.
              In most of this book, we have found it convenient to think of the elemen-
           tary arithmetic operations (multiplications, divisions, or computing remainders)
           as primitive operations that take one unit of time. By counting the number of such
           arithmetic operations that an algorithm performs, we have a basis for making a
           reasonable estimate of the algorithm’s actual running time on a computer. Elemen-
           tary operations can be time-consuming, however, when their inputs are large. It
           thus becomes convenient to measure how many bit operations a number-theoretic
           algorithm requires. In this model, multiplying two ˇ-bit integers by the ordinary
           method uses ‚.ˇ 2 / bit operations. Similarly, we can divide a ˇ-bit integer by a
           shorter integer or take the remainder of a ˇ-bit integer when divided by a shorter in-
           teger in time ‚.ˇ 2 / by simple algorithms. (See Exercise 31.1-12.) Faster methods
           are known. For example, a simple divide-and-conquer method for multiplying two
           ˇ-bit integers has a running time of ‚.ˇ lg 3 /, and the fastest known method has
           a running time of ‚.ˇ lg ˇ lg lg ˇ/. For practical purposes, however, the ‚.ˇ 2 /
           algorithm is often best, and we shall use this bound as a basis for our analyses.
              We shall generally analyze algorithms in this chapter in terms of both the number
           of arithmetic operations and the number of bit operations they require.


31.1 Elementary number-theoretic notions

           This section provides a brief review of notions from elementary number theory
           concerning the set Z D f: : : ; 2; 1; 0; 1; 2; : : :g of integers and the set N D
           f0; 1; 2; : : :g of natural numbers.

           Divisibility and divisors
           The notion of one integer being divisible by another is key to the theory of numbers.
           The notation d j a (read “d divides a”) means that a D kd for some integer k.
           Every integer divides 0. If a > 0 and d j a, then jd j  jaj. If d j a, then we also
           say that a is a multiple of d . If d does not divide a, we write d − a.
              If d j a and d  0, we say that d is a divisor of a. Note that d j a if and only
           if d j a, so that no generality is lost by deﬁning the divisors to be nonnegative,
           with the understanding that the negative of any divisor of a also divides a. A
