256        Chapter 11 Hash Tables




11.2 Hash tables

           The downside of direct addressing is obvious: if the universe U is large, storing
           a table T of size jU j may be impractical, or even impossible, given the memory
           available on a typical computer. Furthermore, the set K of keys actually stored
           may be so small relative to U that most of the space allocated for T would be
           wasted.
              When the set K of keys stored in a dictionary is much smaller than the uni-
           verse U of all possible keys, a hash table requires much less storage than a direct-
           address table. Speciﬁcally, we can reduce the storage requirement to ‚.jKj/ while
           we maintain the beneﬁt that searching for an element in the hash table still requires
           only O.1/ time. The catch is that this bound is for the average-case time, whereas
           for direct addressing it holds for the worst-case time.
              With direct addressing, an element with key k is stored in slot k. With hashing,
           this element is stored in slot h.k/; that is, we use a hash function h to compute the
           slot from the key k. Here, h maps the universe U of keys into the slots of a hash
           table T Œ0 : : m  1:
           h W U ! f0; 1; : : : ; m  1g ;
           where the size m of the hash table is typically much less than jU j. We say that an
           element with key k hashes to slot h.k/; we also say that h.k/ is the hash value of
           key k. Figure 11.2 illustrates the basic idea. The hash function reduces the range
           of array indices and hence the size of the array. Instead of a size of jU j, the array
           can have size m.

                                                              T
                                                                      0
                            U
                    (universe of keys)
                                                                      h(k1)
                                                                      h(k4)
                         k1
                  K           k4
               (actual             k5                                 h(k2) = h(k5)
                keys)
                          k2
                                   k3                                 h(k3)

                                                                      m–1



           Figure 11.2 Using a hash function h to map keys to hash-table slots. Because keys k2 and k5 map
           to the same slot, they collide.
