            33.4 Finding the closest pair of points                                                       1039


                                                                                      q′




                               p
                                                                                  q


                             (a)                                            (b)


            Figure 33.10 The deﬁnition of a star-shaped polygon, for use in Exercise 33.3-4. (a) A star-shaped
            polygon. The segment from point p to any point q on the boundary intersects the boundary only at q.
            (b) A non-star-shaped polygon. The shaded region on the left is the shadow of q, and the shaded
            region on the right is the shadow of q 0 . Since these regions are disjoint, the kernel is empty.


            star-shaped polygon P speciﬁed by its vertices in counterclockwise order, show
            how to compute CH.P / in O.n/ time.

            33.3-5
            In the on-line convex-hull problem, we are given the set Q of n points one point at
            a time. After receiving each point, we compute the convex hull of the points seen
            so far. Obviously, we could run Graham’s scan once for each point, with a total
            running time of O.n2 lg n/. Show how to solve the on-line convex-hull problem in
            a total of O.n2 / time.

            33.3-6 ?
            Show how to implement the incremental method for computing the convex hull
            of n points so that it runs in O.n lg n/ time.



33.4 Finding the closest pair of points

            We now consider the problem of ﬁnding the closest pair of points in a set Q of
            n  2 points. “Closest” refers to the usual euclidean
                                                         p         distance: the distance between
            points p1 D .x1 ; y1 / and p2 D .x2 ; y2 / is .x1  x2 /2 C .y1  y2 /2 . Two points
            in set Q may be coincident, in which case the distance between them is zero. This
            problem has applications in, for example, trafﬁc-control systems. A system for
            controlling air or sea trafﬁc might need to identify the two closest vehicles in order
            to detect potential collisions.
               A brute-force closest-pair algorithm simply looks at all the n2 D ‚.n2 / pairs
            of points. In this section, we shall describe a divide-and-conquer algorithm for
