           Problems for Chapter 34                                                       1101


           ments in the set f0; 1g such that Ax  b. Prove that 0-1 integer programming is
           NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from 3-CNF-SAT.)

           34.5-3
           The integer linear-programming problem is like the 0-1 integer-programming
           problem given in Exercise 34.5-2, except that the values of the vector x may be
           any integers rather than just 0 or 1. Assuming that the 0-1 integer-programming
           problem is NP-hard, show that the integer linear-programming problem is NP-
           complete.

           34.5-4
           Show how to solve the subset-sum problem in polynomial time if the target value t
           is expressed in unary.

           34.5-5
           The set-partition problem takes as input a set S of numbers. The question is
           whether
               P the numbers
                           P     can be partitioned into two sets A and A D S  A such
           that x2A x D x2A x. Show that the set-partition problem is NP-complete.

           34.5-6
           Show that the hamiltonian-path problem is NP-complete.

           34.5-7
           The longest-simple-cycle problem is the problem of determining a simple cycle
           (no repeated vertices) of maximum length in a graph. Formulate a related decision
           problem, and show that the decision problem is NP-complete.

           34.5-8
           In the half 3-CNF satisﬁability problem, we are given a 3-CNF formula  with n
           variables and m clauses, where m is even. We wish to determine whether there
           exists a truth assignment to the variables of  such that exactly half the clauses
           evaluate to 0 and exactly half the clauses evaluate to 1. Prove that the half 3-CNF
           satisﬁability problem is NP-complete.



Problems

           34-1 Independent set
           An independent set of a graph G D .V; E/ is a subset V 0  V of vertices such
           that each edge in E is incident on at most one vertex in V 0 . The independent-set
           problem is to ﬁnd a maximum-size independent set in G.
