940   Chapter 31 Number-Theoretic Algorithms


      4. Inverses: For each a 2 S, there exists a unique element b 2 S, called the
         inverse of a, such that a ˚ b D b ˚ a D e.
      As an example, consider the familiar group .Z; C/ of the integers Z under the
      operation of addition: 0 is the identity, and the inverse of a is a. If a group .S; ˚/
      satisﬁes the commutative law a ˚ b D b ˚ a for all a; b 2 S, then it is an abelian
      group. If a group .S; ˚/ satisﬁes jSj < 1, then it is a ﬁnite group.

      The groups deﬁned by modular addition and multiplication
      We can form two ﬁnite abelian groups by using addition and multiplication mod-
      ulo n, where n is a positive integer. These groups are based on the equivalence
      classes of the integers modulo n, deﬁned in Section 31.1.
         To deﬁne a group on Zn , we need to have suitable binary operations, which
      we obtain by redeﬁning the ordinary operations of addition and multiplication.
      We can easily deﬁne addition and multiplication operations for Zn , because the
      equivalence class of two integers uniquely determines the equivalence class of their
      sum or product. That is, if a  a0 .mod n/ and b  b 0 .mod n/, then
      a C b  a0 C b 0 .mod n/ ;
      ab     a0 b 0   .mod n/ :
      Thus, we deﬁne addition and multiplication modulo n, denoted Cn and n , by
      Œan Cn Œbn D Œa C bn ;                                                      (31.18)
      Œan n Œbn D Œabn :
      (We can deﬁne subtraction similarly on Zn by Œan n Œbn D Œa  bn , but divi-
      sion is more complicated, as we shall see.) These facts justify the common and
      convenient practice of using the smallest nonnegative element of each equivalence
      class as its representative when performing computations in Zn . We add, subtract,
      and multiply as usual on the representatives, but we replace each result x by the
      representative of its class, that is, by x mod n.
         Using this deﬁnition of addition modulo n, we deﬁne the additive group
      modulo n as .Zn ; Cn /. The size of the additive group modulo n is jZn j D n.
      Figure 31.2(a) gives the operation table for the group .Z6 ; C6 /.

      Theorem 31.12
      The system .Zn ; Cn / is a ﬁnite abelian group.

      Proof Equation (31.18) shows that .Zn ; Cn / is closed. Associativity and com-
      mutativity of Cn follow from the associativity and commutativity of C:
