1038   Chapter 33 Computational Geometry


       with respect to p1 , and so on. When we reach the highest vertex, say pk (breaking
       ties by choosing the farthest such vertex), we have constructed, as Figure 33.9
       shows, the right chain of CH.Q/. To construct the left chain, we start at pk and
       choose pkC1 as the point with the smallest polar angle with respect to pk , but from
       the negative x-axis. We continue on, forming the left chain by taking polar angles
       from the negative x-axis, until we come back to our original vertex p0 .
          We could implement Jarvis’s march in one conceptual sweep around the convex
       hull, that is, without separately constructing the right and left chains. Such imple-
       mentations typically keep track of the angle of the last convex-hull side chosen and
       require the sequence of angles of hull sides to be strictly increasing (in the range
       of 0 to 2 radians). The advantage of constructing separate chains is that we need
       not explicitly compute angles; the techniques of Section 33.1 sufﬁce to compare
       angles.
          If implemented properly, Jarvis’s march has a running time of O.nh/. For each
       of the h vertices of CH.Q/, we ﬁnd the vertex with the minimum polar angle. Each
       comparison between polar angles takes O.1/ time, using the techniques of Sec-
       tion 33.1. As Section 9.1 shows, we can compute the minimum of n values in O.n/
       time if each comparison takes O.1/ time. Thus, Jarvis’s march takes O.nh/ time.

       Exercises

       33.3-1
       Prove that in the procedure G RAHAM -S CAN, points p1 and pm must be vertices
       of CH.Q/.

       33.3-2
       Consider a model of computation that supports addition, comparison, and multipli-
       cation and for which there is a lower bound of .n lg n/ to sort n numbers. Prove
       that .n lg n/ is a lower bound for computing, in order, the vertices of the convex
       hull of a set of n points in such a model.

       33.3-3
       Given a set of points Q, prove that the pair of points farthest from each other must
       be vertices of CH.Q/.

       33.3-4
       For a given polygon P and a point q on its boundary, the shadow of q is the set
       of points r such that the segment qr is entirely on the boundary or in the interior
       of P . As Figure 33.10 illustrates, a polygon P is star-shaped if there exists a
       point p in the interior of P that is in the shadow of every point on the boundary
       of P . The set of all such points p is called the kernel of P . Given an n-vertex,
