458   Chapter 17 Amortized Analysis


         Moreover, we can also charge M ULTIPOP operations nothing. To pop the ﬁrst
      plate, we take the dollar of credit off the plate and use it to pay the actual cost of a
      P OP operation. To pop a second plate, we again have a dollar of credit on the plate
      to pay for the P OP operation, and so on. Thus, we have always charged enough
      up front to pay for M ULTIPOP operations. In other words, since each plate on the
      stack has 1 dollar of credit on it, and the stack always has a nonnegative number of
      plates, we have ensured that the amount of credit is always nonnegative. Thus, for
      any sequence of n P USH, P OP, and M ULTIPOP operations, the total amortized cost
      is an upper bound on the total actual cost. Since the total amortized cost is O.n/,
      so is the total actual cost.

      Incrementing a binary counter
      As another illustration of the accounting method, we analyze the I NCREMENT op-
      eration on a binary counter that starts at zero. As we observed earlier, the running
      time of this operation is proportional to the number of bits ﬂipped, which we shall
      use as our cost for this example. Let us once again use a dollar bill to represent
      each unit of cost (the ﬂipping of a bit in this example).
         For the amortized analysis, let us charge an amortized cost of 2 dollars to set a
      bit to 1. When a bit is set, we use 1 dollar (out of the 2 dollars charged) to pay
      for the actual setting of the bit, and we place the other dollar on the bit as credit to
      be used later when we ﬂip the bit back to 0. At any point in time, every 1 in the
      counter has a dollar of credit on it, and thus we can charge nothing to reset a bit
      to 0; we just pay for the reset with the dollar bill on the bit.
         Now we can determine the amortized cost of I NCREMENT. The cost of resetting
      the bits within the while loop is paid for by the dollars on the bits that are reset. The
      I NCREMENT procedure sets at most one bit, in line 6, and therefore the amortized
      cost of an I NCREMENT operation is at most 2 dollars. The number of 1s in the
      counter never becomes negative, and thus the amount of credit stays nonnegative
      at all times. Thus, for n I NCREMENT operations, the total amortized cost is O.n/,
      which bounds the total actual cost.

      Exercises

      17.2-1
      Suppose we perform a sequence of stack operations on a stack whose size never
      exceeds k. After every k operations, we make a copy of the entire stack for backup
      purposes. Show that the cost of n stack operations, including copying the stack,
      is O.n/ by assigning suitable amortized costs to the various stack operations.
