15.3 Elements of dynamic programming                                                          387


Reconstructing an optimal solution
As a practical matter, we often store which choice we made in each subproblem in
a table so that we do not have to reconstruct this information from the costs that we
stored.
   For matrix-chain multiplication, the table sŒi; j  saves us a signiﬁcant amount of
work when reconstructing an optimal solution. Suppose that we did not maintain
the sŒi; j  table, having ﬁlled in only the table mŒi; j  containing optimal subprob-
lem costs. We choose from among j  i possibilities when we determine which
subproblems to use in an optimal solution to parenthesizing Ai Ai C1    Aj , and
j  i is not a constant. Therefore, it would take ‚.j  i/ D !.1/ time to recon-
struct which subproblems we chose for a solution to a given problem. By storing
in sŒi; j  the index of the matrix at which we split the product Ai Ai C1    Aj , we
can reconstruct each choice in O.1/ time.

Memoization
As we saw for the rod-cutting problem, there is an alternative approach to dy-
namic programming that often offers the efﬁciency of the bottom-up dynamic-
programming approach while maintaining a top-down strategy. The idea is to
memoize the natural, but inefﬁcient, recursive algorithm. As in the bottom-up ap-
proach, we maintain a table with subproblem solutions, but the control structure
for ﬁlling in the table is more like the recursive algorithm.
   A memoized recursive algorithm maintains an entry in a table for the solution to
each subproblem. Each table entry initially contains a special value to indicate that
the entry has yet to be ﬁlled in. When the subproblem is ﬁrst encountered as the
recursive algorithm unfolds, its solution is computed and then stored in the table.
Each subsequent time that we encounter this subproblem, we simply look up the
value stored in the table and return it.5
   Here is a memoized version of R ECURSIVE -M ATRIX -C HAIN. Note where it
resembles the memoized top-down method for the rod-cutting problem.


5 This approach presupposes that we know the set of all possible subproblem parameters and that we

have established the relationship between table positions and subproblems. Another, more general,
approach is to memoize by using hashing with the subproblem parameters as keys.
