4   Part I Foundations


       Chapter 4 delves further into the divide-and-conquer method introduced in
    Chapter 2. It provides additional examples of divide-and-conquer algorithms, in-
    cluding Strassen’s surprising method for multiplying two square matrices. Chap-
    ter 4 contains methods for solving recurrences, which are useful for describing
    the running times of recursive algorithms. One powerful technique is the “mas-
    ter method,” which we often use to solve recurrences that arise from divide-and-
    conquer algorithms. Although much of Chapter 4 is devoted to proving the cor-
    rectness of the master method, you may skip this proof yet still employ the master
    method.
       Chapter 5 introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. We typ-
    ically use probabilistic analysis to determine the running time of an algorithm in
    cases in which, due to the presence of an inherent probability distribution, the
    running time may differ on different inputs of the same size. In some cases, we
    assume that the inputs conform to a known probability distribution, so that we are
    averaging the running time over all possible inputs. In other cases, the probability
    distribution comes not from the inputs but from random choices made during the
    course of the algorithm. An algorithm whose behavior is determined not only by its
    input but by the values produced by a random-number generator is a randomized
    algorithm. We can use randomized algorithms to enforce a probability distribution
    on the inputs—thereby ensuring that no particular input always causes poor perfor-
    mance—or even to bound the error rate of algorithms that are allowed to produce
    incorrect results on a limited basis.
       Appendices A–D contain other mathematical material that you will ﬁnd helpful
    as you read this book. You are likely to have seen much of the material in the
    appendix chapters before having read this book (although the speciﬁc deﬁnitions
    and notational conventions we use may differ in some cases from what you have
    seen in the past), and so you should think of the Appendices as reference material.
    On the other hand, you probably have not already seen most of the material in
    Part I. All the chapters in Part I and the Appendices are written with a tutorial
    ﬂavor.
