           Notes for Chapter 8                                                               211


           couple of deﬁnitions will help you apply the 0-1 sorting lemma. We say that an area
           of an array is clean if we know that it contains either all 0s or all 1s. Otherwise,
           the area might contain mixed 0s and 1s, and it is dirty. From here on, assume that
           the input array contains only 0s and 1s, and that we can treat it as an array with r
           rows and s columns.
           d. Prove that after steps 1–3, the array consists of some clean rows of 0s at the top,
              some clean rows of 1s at the bottom, and at most s dirty rows between them.

           e. Prove that after step 4, the array, read in column-major order, starts with a clean
              area of 0s, ends with a clean area of 1s, and has a dirty area of at most s 2
              elements in the middle.

           f. Prove that steps 5–8 produce a fully sorted 0-1 output. Conclude that column-
              sort correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.

           g. Now suppose that s does not divide r. Prove that after steps 1–3, the array
              consists of some clean rows of 0s at the top, some clean rows of 1s at the
              bottom, and at most 2s  1 dirty rows between them. How large must r be,
              compared with s, for columnsort to correctly sort when s does not divide r?

           h. Suggest a simple change to step 1 that allows us to maintain the requirement
              that r  2s 2 even when s does not divide r, and prove that with your change,
              columnsort correctly sorts.


Chapter notes

           The decision-tree model for studying comparison sorts was introduced by Ford
           and Johnson [110]. Knuth’s comprehensive treatise on sorting [211] covers many
           variations on the sorting problem, including the information-theoretic lower bound
           on the complexity of sorting given here. Ben-Or [39] studied lower bounds for
           sorting using generalizations of the decision-tree model.
              Knuth credits H. H. Seward with inventing counting sort in 1954, as well as with
           the idea of combining counting sort with radix sort. Radix sorting starting with the
           least signiﬁcant digit appears to be a folk algorithm widely used by operators of
           mechanical card-sorting machines. According to Knuth, the ﬁrst published refer-
           ence to the method is a 1929 document by L. J. Comrie describing punched-card
           equipment. Bucket sorting has been in use since 1956, when the basic idea was
           proposed by E. J. Isaac and R. C. Singleton [188].
              Munro and Raman [263] give a stable sorting algorithm that performs O.n1C /
           comparisons in the worst case, where 0 <   1 is any ﬁxed constant. Although
