570       Chapter 21 Data Structures for Disjoint Sets


                                                   f


                                         e

                                                                                                           f
                                d


                      c                                    a        b         c         d        e


             b


      a


                          (a)                                                     (b)


          Figure 21.5 Path compression during the operation F IND -S ET . Arrows and self-loops at roots are
          omitted. (a) A tree representing a set prior to executing F IND -S ET.a/. Triangles represent subtrees
          whose roots are the nodes shown. Each node has a pointer to its parent. (b) The same set after
          executing F IND -S ET.a/. Each node on the ﬁnd path now points directly to the root.


          Pseudocode for disjoint-set forests
          To implement a disjoint-set forest with the union-by-rank heuristic, we must keep
          track of ranks. With each node x, we maintain the integer value x:rank, which is
          an upper bound on the height of x (the number of edges in the longest simple path
          between x and a descendant leaf). When M AKE -S ET creates a singleton set, the
          single node in the corresponding tree has an initial rank of 0. Each F IND -S ET oper-
          ation leaves all ranks unchanged. The U NION operation has two cases, depending
          on whether the roots of the trees have equal rank. If the roots have unequal rank,
          we make the root with higher rank the parent of the root with lower rank, but the
          ranks themselves remain unchanged. If, instead, the roots have equal ranks, we
          arbitrarily choose one of the roots as the parent and increment its rank.
             Let us put this method into pseudocode. We designate the parent of node x
          by x:p. The L INK procedure, a subroutine called by U NION, takes pointers to two
          roots as inputs.
