15.1 Rod cutting                                                                                367


        4


        3


        2


        1


        0



Figure 15.4 The subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem with n D 4. The vertex labels
give the sizes of the corresponding subproblems. A directed edge .x; y/ indicates that we need a
solution to subproblem y when solving subproblem x. This graph is a reduced version of the tree of
Figure 15.3, in which all nodes with the same label are collapsed into a single vertex and all edges
go from parent to child.


directly references array entry rŒj  i instead of making a recursive call to solve
the subproblem of size j  i. Line 7 saves in rŒj  the solution to the subproblem
of size j . Finally, line 8 returns rŒn, which equals the optimal value rn .
   The bottom-up and top-down versions have the same asymptotic running time.
The running time of procedure B OTTOM -U P -C UT-ROD is ‚.n2 /, due to its
doubly-nested loop structure. The number of iterations of its inner for loop, in
lines 5–6, forms an arithmetic series. The running time of its top-down counterpart,
M EMOIZED -C UT-ROD, is also ‚.n2 /, although this running time may be a little
harder to see. Because a recursive call to solve a previously solved subproblem
returns immediately, M EMOIZED -C UT-ROD solves each subproblem just once. It
solves subproblems for sizes 0; 1; : : : ; n. To solve a subproblem of size n, the for
loop of lines 6–7 iterates n times. Thus, the total number of iterations of this for
loop, over all recursive calls of M EMOIZED -C UT-ROD, forms an arithmetic series,
giving a total of ‚.n2 / iterations, just like the inner for loop of B OTTOM -U P -
C UT-ROD. (We actually are using a form of aggregate analysis here. We shall see
aggregate analysis in detail in Section 17.1.)

Subproblem graphs
When we think about a dynamic-programming problem, we should understand the
set of subproblems involved and how subproblems depend on one another.
   The subproblem graph for the problem embodies exactly this information. Fig-
ure 15.4 shows the subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem with n D 4. It
is a directed graph, containing one vertex for each distinct subproblem. The sub-
