906       Chapter 30 Polynomials and the FFT


          30.1-5
                                                                      2
                                                             Q ‚.n /. (Hint: First compute
          Show how to use equation (30.5) to interpolate in time
          the coefﬁcient representation of the polynomial j .x  xj / and then divide by
          .x  xk / as necessary for the numerator of each term; see Exercise 30.1-2. You can
          compute each of the n denominators in time O.n/.)

          30.1-6
          Explain what is wrong with the “obvious” approach to polynomial division using
          a point-value representation, i.e., dividing the corresponding y values. Discuss
          separately the case in which the division comes out exactly and the case in which
          it doesn’t.

          30.1-7
          Consider two sets A and B, each having n integers in the range from 0 to 10n. We
          wish to compute the Cartesian sum of A and B, deﬁned by
          C D fx C y W x 2 A and y 2 Bg :
          Note that the integers in C are in the range from 0 to 20n. We want to ﬁnd the
          elements of C and the number of times each element of C is realized as a sum of
          elements in A and B. Show how to solve the problem in O.n lg n/ time. (Hint:
          Represent A and B as polynomials of degree at most 10n.)



30.2 The DFT and FFT

          In Section 30.1, we claimed that if we use complex roots of unity, we can evaluate
          and interpolate polynomials in ‚.n lg n/ time. In this section, we deﬁne complex
          roots of unity and study their properties, deﬁne the DFT, and then show how the
          FFT computes the DFT and its inverse in ‚.n lg n/ time.

          Complex roots of unity
          A complex nth root of unity is a complex number ! such that
          !n D 1 :
          There are exactly n complex nth roots of unity: e 2 i k=n for k D 0; 1; : : : ; n  1.
          To interpret this formula, we use the deﬁnition of the exponential of a complex
          number:
          e i u D cos.u/ C i sin.u/ :
          Figure 30.2 shows that the n complex roots of unity are equally spaced around the
          circle of unit radius centered at the origin of the complex plane. The value
