714        Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


           26.1-4
           Let f be a ﬂow in a network, and let ˛ be a real number. The scalar ﬂow product,
           denoted ˛f , is a function from V V to R deﬁned by
           .˛f /.u; / D ˛  f .u; / :
           Prove that the ﬂows in a network form a convex set. That is, show that if f1 and f2
           are ﬂows, then so is ˛f1 C .1  ˛/f2 for all ˛ in the range 0  ˛  1.

           26.1-5
           State the maximum-ﬂow problem as a linear-programming problem.

           26.1-6
           Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately, dislike each other. The prob-
           lem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school together, but in fact
           each one refuses to walk on any block that the other child has stepped on that day.
           The children have no problem with their paths crossing at a corner. Fortunately
           both the professor’s house and the school are on corners, but beyond that he is not
           sure if it is going to be possible to send both of his children to the same school.
           The professor has a map of his town. Show how to formulate the problem of de-
           termining whether both his children can go to the same school as a maximum-ﬂow
           problem.

           26.1-7
           Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a ﬂow network has vertex capacities.
           That is each vertex  has a limit l./ on how much ﬂow can pass though . Show
           how to transform a ﬂow network G D .V; E/ with vertex capacities into an equiv-
           alent ﬂow network G 0 D .V 0 ; E 0 / without vertex capacities, such that a maximum
           ﬂow in G 0 has the same value as a maximum ﬂow in G. How many vertices and
           edges does G 0 have?



26.2 The Ford-Fulkerson method

           This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the maximum-ﬂow
           problem. We call it a “method” rather than an “algorithm” because it encompasses
           several implementations with differing running times. The Ford-Fulkerson method
           depends on three important ideas that transcend the method and are relevant to
           many ﬂow algorithms and problems: residual networks, augmenting paths, and
           cuts. These ideas are essential to the important max-ﬂow min-cut theorem (The-
           orem 26.6), which characterizes the value of a maximum ﬂow in terms of cuts of
