            4.2 Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication                             75


            ray is 0. How would you change any of the algorithms that do not allow empty
            subarrays to permit an empty subarray to be the result?

            4.1-5
            Use the following ideas to develop a nonrecursive, linear-time algorithm for the
            maximum-subarray problem. Start at the left end of the array, and progress toward
            the right, keeping track of the maximum subarray seen so far. Knowing a maximum
            subarray of AŒ1 : : j , extend the answer to ﬁnd a maximum subarray ending at in-
            dex j C1 by using the following observation: a maximum subarray of AŒ1 : : j C 1
            is either a maximum subarray of AŒ1 : : j  or a subarray AŒi : : j C 1, for some
            1  i  j C 1. Determine a maximum subarray of the form AŒi : : j C 1 in
            constant time based on knowing a maximum subarray ending at index j .



4.2 Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication

            If you have seen matrices before, then you probably know how to multiply them.
            (Otherwise, you should read Section D.1 in Appendix D.) If A D .aij / and
            B D .bij / are square n n matrices, then in the product C D A  B, we deﬁne the
            entry cij , for i; j D 1; 2; : : : ; n, by
                    X
                    n
            cij D         ai k  bkj :                                                   (4.8)
                    kD1

            We must compute n2 matrix entries, and each is the sum of n values. The following
            procedure takes n n matrices A and B and multiplies them, returning their n n
            product C . We assume that each matrix has an attribute rows, giving the number
            of rows in the matrix.

            S QUARE -M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY .A; B/
            1 n D A:rows
            2 let C be a new n n matrix
            3 for i D 1 to n
            4      for j D 1 to n
            5           cij D 0
            6           for k D 1 to n
            7                cij D cij C ai k  bkj
            8 return C

              The S QUARE -M ATRIX -M ULTIPLY procedure works as follows. The for loop
            of lines 3–7 computes the entries of each row i, and within a given row i, the
