510        Chapter 19 Fibonacci Heaps




19.2 Mergeable-heap operations

           The mergeable-heap operations on Fibonacci heaps delay work as long as possible.
           The various operations have performance trade-offs. For example, we insert a node
           by adding it to the root list, which takes just constant time. If we were to start
           with an empty Fibonacci heap and then insert k nodes, the Fibonacci heap would
           consist of just a root list of k nodes. The trade-off is that if we then perform
           an E XTRACT-M IN operation on Fibonacci heap H , after removing the node that
           H:min points to, we would have to look through each of the remaining k  1 nodes
           in the root list to ﬁnd the new minimum node. As long as we have to go through
           the entire root list during the E XTRACT-M IN operation, we also consolidate nodes
           into min-heap-ordered trees to reduce the size of the root list. We shall see that, no
           matter what the root list looks like before a E XTRACT-M IN operation, afterward
           each node in the root list has a degree that is unique within the root list, which leads
           to a root list of size at most D.n/ C 1.

           Creating a new Fibonacci heap
           To make an empty Fibonacci heap, the M AKE -F IB -H EAP procedure allocates and
           returns the Fibonacci heap object H , where H:n D 0 and H:min D NIL; there
           are no trees in H . Because t.H / D 0 and m.H / D 0, the potential of the empty
           Fibonacci heap is ˆ.H / D 0. The amortized cost of M AKE -F IB -H EAP is thus
           equal to its O.1/ actual cost.

           Inserting a node
           The following procedure inserts node x into Fibonacci heap H , assuming that the
           node has already been allocated and that x:key has already been ﬁlled in.
           F IB -H EAP -I NSERT .H; x/
            1 x:degree D 0
            2 x:p D NIL
            3 x:child D NIL
            4 x:mark D FALSE
            5 if H:min == NIL
            6        create a root list for H containing just x
            7        H:min D x
            8 else insert x into H ’s root list
            9        if x:key < H:min:key
           10              H:min D x
           11 H: n D H: n C 1
