612         Chapter 22 Elementary Graph Algorithms


            22.3-9
            Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G contains a path
            from u to , then any depth-ﬁrst search must result in :d  u:f .

            22.3-10
            Modify the pseudocode for depth-ﬁrst search so that it prints out every edge in the
            directed graph G, together with its type. Show what modiﬁcations, if any, you need
            to make if G is undirected.

            22.3-11
            Explain how a vertex u of a directed graph can end up in a depth-ﬁrst tree contain-
            ing only u, even though u has both incoming and outgoing edges in G.

            22.3-12
            Show that we can use a depth-ﬁrst search of an undirected graph G to identify the
            connected components of G, and that the depth-ﬁrst forest contains as many trees
            as G has connected components. More precisely, show how to modify depth-ﬁrst
            search so that it assigns to each vertex  an integer label :cc between 1 and k,
            where k is the number of connected components of G, such that u:cc D :cc if
            and only if u and  are in the same connected component.

            22.3-13 ?
            A directed graph G D .V; E/ is singly connected if u ;  implies that G contains
            at most one simple path from u to  for all vertices u;  2 V . Give an efﬁcient
            algorithm to determine whether or not a directed graph is singly connected.



22.4 Topological sort

            This section shows how we can use depth-ﬁrst search to perform a topological sort
            of a directed acyclic graph, or a “dag” as it is sometimes called. A topological sort
            of a dag G D .V; E/ is a linear ordering of all its vertices such that if G contains an
            edge .u; /, then u appears before  in the ordering. (If the graph contains a cycle,
            then no linear ordering is possible.) We can view a topological sort of a graph as
            an ordering of its vertices along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from
            left to right. Topological sorting is thus different from the usual kind of “sorting”
            studied in Part II.
               Many applications use directed acyclic graphs to indicate precedences among
            events. Figure 22.7 gives an example that arises when Professor Bumstead gets
            dressed in the morning. The professor must don certain garments before others
            (e.g., socks before shoes). Other items may be put on in any order (e.g., socks and
