5.4 Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables           133


      X
      k X
        k
XD                   Xij :
      i D1 j Di C1

Taking expectations of both sides and applying linearity of expectation, we obtain
             " k             #
               X X   k
E ŒX  D E               Xij
                     i D1 j Di C1

              X
              k       X
                      k
         D                   E ŒXij 
              i D1 j Di C1
                 !
                k 1
         D
                2 n
              k.k  1/
         D             :
                 2n
When k.k  1/  2n, therefore, the expected number     p of pairs of people with the
same birthday is at least 1. Thus, if we have at least 2nC1 individuals in a room,
we can expect at least two to have the same birthday. For n D 365, if k D 28, the
expected number of pairs with the same birthday is .28  27/=.2  365/  1:0356.
Thus, with at least 28 people, we expect to ﬁnd at least one matching pair of birth-
days. On Mars, where a year is 669 Martian days long, we need at least 38 Mar-
tians.
   The ﬁrst analysis, which used only probabilities, determined the number of peo-
ple required for the probability to exceed 1=2 that a matching pair of birthdays
exists, and the second analysis, which used indicator random variables, determined
the number such that the expected number of matching birthdays is 1. Although
the exact numbers
              p     of people differ for the two situations, they are the same asymp-
totically: ‚. n/.

5.4.2 Balls and bins
Consider a process in which we randomly toss identical balls into b bins, numbered
1; 2; : : : ; b. The tosses are independent, and on each toss the ball is equally likely
to end up in any bin. The probability that a tossed ball lands in any given bin is 1=b.
Thus, the ball-tossing process is a sequence of Bernoulli trials (see Appendix C.4)
with a probability 1=b of success, where success means that the ball falls in the
given bin. This model is particularly useful for analyzing hashing (see Chapter 11),
and we can answer a variety of interesting questions about the ball-tossing process.
(Problem C-1 asks additional questions about balls and bins.)
