Problems for Appendix B                                                          1181


b. Show that the following are equivalent:
   1. G is bipartite.
   2. G is 2-colorable.
   3. G has no cycles of odd length.

c. Let d be the maximum degree of any vertex in a graph G. Prove that we can
   color G with d C 1 colors.
                                                                p
d. Show that if G has O.jV j/ edges, then we can color G with O. jV j/ colors.

B-2 Friendly graphs
Reword each of the following statements as a theorem about undirected graphs,
and then prove it. Assume that friendship is symmetric but not reﬂexive.
a. Any group of at least two people contains at least two people with the same
   number of friends in the group.

b. Every group of six people contains either at least three mutual friends or at least
   three mutual strangers.

c. Any group of people can be partitioned into two subgroups such that at least
   half the friends of each person belong to the subgroup of which that person is
   not a member.

d. If everyone in a group is the friend of at least half the people in the group, then
   the group can be seated around a table in such a way that everyone is seated
   between two friends.

B-3 Bisecting trees
Many divide-and-conquer algorithms that operate on graphs require that the graph
be bisected into two nearly equal-sized subgraphs, which are induced by a partition
of the vertices. This problem investigates bisections of trees formed by removing a
small number of edges. We require that whenever two vertices end up in the same
subtree after removing edges, then they must be in the same partition.
a. Show that we can partition the vertices of any n-vertex binary tree into two
   sets A and B, such that jAj  3n=4 and jBj  3n=4, by removing a single
   edge.

b. Show that the constant 3=4 in part (a) is optimal in the worst case by giving
   an example of a simple binary tree whose most evenly balanced partition upon
   removal of a single edge has jAj D 3n=4.
