35   Approximation Algorithms




     Many problems of practical signiﬁcance are NP-complete, yet they are too impor-
     tant to abandon merely because we don’t know how to ﬁnd an optimal solution in
     polynomial time. Even if a problem is NP-complete, there may be hope. We have at
     least three ways to get around NP-completeness. First, if the actual inputs are small,
     an algorithm with exponential running time may be perfectly satisfactory. Second,
     we may be able to isolate important special cases that we can solve in polynomial
     time. Third, we might come up with approaches to ﬁnd near-optimal solutions in
     polynomial time (either in the worst case or the expected case). In practice, near-
     optimality is often good enough. We call an algorithm that returns near-optimal
     solutions an approximation algorithm. This chapter presents polynomial-time ap-
     proximation algorithms for several NP-complete problems.

     Performance ratios for approximation algorithms
     Suppose that we are working on an optimization problem in which each potential
     solution has a positive cost, and we wish to ﬁnd a near-optimal solution. Depending
     on the problem, we may deﬁne an optimal solution as one with maximum possi-
     ble cost or one with minimum possible cost; that is, the problem may be either a
     maximization or a minimization problem.
        We say that an algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio of .n/ if,
     for any input of size n, the cost C of the solution produced by the algorithm is
     within a factor of .n/ of the cost C  of an optimal solution:
                    
            C C
     max        ;       .n/ :                                                    (35.1)
            C C
     If an algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of .n/, we call it a .n/-approx-
     imation algorithm. The deﬁnitions of the approximation ratio and of a .n/-
     approximation algorithm apply to both minimization and maximization problems.
     For a maximization problem, 0 < C  C  , and the ratio C  =C gives the factor
     by which the cost of an optimal solution is larger than the cost of the approximate
