1224   Appendix D   Matrices


       Theorem D.1
       A square matrix has full rank if and only if it is nonsingular.


          A null vector for a matrix A is a nonzero vector x such that Ax D 0. The
       following theorem (whose proof is left as Exercise D.2-7) and its corollary relate
       the notions of column rank and singularity to null vectors.

       Theorem D.2
       A matrix A has full column rank if and only if it does not have a null vector.


       Corollary D.3
       A square matrix A is singular if and only if it has a null vector.


          The ij th minor of an n n matrix A, for n > 1, is the .n1/ .n1/ matrix AŒij 
       obtained by deleting the ith row and j th column of A. We deﬁne the determinant

                    ‚a
       of an n n matrix A recursively in terms of its minors by
                                                       if n D 1 ;
                         11

       det.A/ D      X
                     n
                              .1/1Cj a1j det.AŒ1j  / if n > 1 :
                     j D1

       The term .1/i Cj det.AŒij  / is known as the cofactor of the element aij .
         The following theorems, whose proofs are omitted here, express fundamental
       properties of the determinant.

       Theorem D.4 (Determinant properties)
       The determinant of a square matrix A has the following properties:
          If any row or any column of A is zero, then det.A/ D 0.
          The determinant of A is multiplied by  if the entries of any one row (or any
           one column) of A are all multiplied by .
          The determinant of A is unchanged if the entries in one row (respectively, col-
           umn) are added to those in another row (respectively, column).
          The determinant of A equals the determinant of AT .
          The determinant of A is multiplied by 1 if any two rows (or any two columns)
           are exchanged.
       Also, for any square matrices A and B, we have det.AB/ D det.A/ det.B/.
