422   Chapter 16 Greedy Algorithms


      Assume that the inputs have been sorted as in equation (16.1). Compare the running
      time of your solution to the running time of G REEDY-ACTIVITY-S ELECTOR.

      16.1-2
      Suppose that instead of always selecting the ﬁrst activity to ﬁnish, we instead select
      the last activity to start that is compatible with all previously selected activities. De-
      scribe how this approach is a greedy algorithm, and prove that it yields an optimal
      solution.

      16.1-3
      Not just any greedy approach to the activity-selection problem produces a max-
      imum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Give an example to show that
      the approach of selecting the activity of least duration from among those that are
      compatible with previously selected activities does not work. Do the same for
      the approaches of always selecting the compatible activity that overlaps the fewest
      other remaining activities and always selecting the compatible remaining activity
      with the earliest start time.

      16.1-4
      Suppose that we have a set of activities to schedule among a large number of lecture
      halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall. We wish to schedule
      all the activities using as few lecture halls as possible. Give an efﬁcient greedy
      algorithm to determine which activity should use which lecture hall.
         (This problem is also known as the interval-graph coloring problem. We can
      create an interval graph whose vertices are the given activities and whose edges
      connect incompatible activities. The smallest number of colors required to color
      every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color corresponds to
      ﬁnding the fewest lecture halls needed to schedule all of the given activities.)

      16.1-5
      Consider a modiﬁcation to the activity-selection problem in which each activity ai
      has, in addition to a start and ﬁnish time, a value i . The objective is no longer
      to maximize the number of activities scheduled, but instead to maximize the total
                           P scheduled. That is, we wish to choose a set A of compatible
      value of the activities
      activities such that ak 2A k is maximized. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for
      this problem.
