Problems for Chapter 19                                                         527


a. The professor’s claim that this procedure runs faster is based partly on the as-
   sumption that line 7 can be performed in O.1/ actual time. What is wrong with
   this assumption?

b. Give a good upper bound on the actual time of P ISANO -D ELETE when x is
   not H:min. Your bound should be in terms of x:degree and the number c of
   calls to the C ASCADING -C UT procedure.

c. Suppose that we call P ISANO -D ELETE .H; x/, and let H 0 be the Fibonacci heap
   that results. Assuming that node x is not a root, bound the potential of H 0 in
   terms of x:degree, c, t.H /, and m.H /.

d. Conclude that the amortized time for P ISANO -D ELETE is asymptotically no
   better than for F IB -H EAP -D ELETE, even when x ¤ H:min.

19-2 Binomial trees and binomial heaps
The binomial tree Bk is an ordered tree (see Section B.5.2) deﬁned recursively.
As shown in Figure 19.6(a), the binomial tree B0 consists of a single node. The
binomial tree Bk consists of two binomial trees Bk1 that are linked together so
that the root of one is the leftmost child of the root of the other. Figure 19.6(b)
shows the binomial trees B0 through B4 .
a. Show that for the binomial tree Bk ,
   1. there are 2k nodes,
   2. the height of the tree is k,
   3. there are exactly ki nodes at depth i for i D 0; 1; : : : ; k, and
   4. the root has degree k, which is greater than that of any other node; moreover,
      as Figure 19.6(c) shows, if we number the children of the root from left to
      right by k  1; k  2; : : : ; 0, then child i is the root of a subtree Bi .
   A binomial heap H is a set of binomial trees that satisﬁes the following proper-
ties:
1. Each node has a key (like a Fibonacci heap).
2. Each binomial tree in H obeys the min-heap property.
3. For any nonnegative integer k, there is at most one binomial tree in H whose
   root has degree k.
b. Suppose that a binomial heap H has a total of n nodes. Discuss the relationship
   between the binomial trees that H contains and the binary representation of n.
   Conclude that H consists of at most blg nc C 1 binomial trees.
