208   Chapter 8 Sorting in Linear Time


      8-6 Lower bound on merging sorted lists
      The problem of merging two sorted lists arises frequently. We have seen a pro-
      cedure for it as the subroutine M ERGE in Section 2.3.1. In this problem, we will
      prove a lower bound of 2n  1 on the worst-case number of comparisons required
      to merge two sorted lists, each containing n items.
         First we will show a lower bound of 2n  o.n/ comparisons by using a decision
      tree.
      a. Given 2n numbers, compute the number of possible ways to divide them into
         two sorted lists, each with n numbers.

      b. Using a decision tree and your answer to part (a), show that any algorithm that
         correctly merges two sorted lists must perform at least 2n  o.n/ comparisons.
      Now we will show a slightly tighter 2n  1 bound.
      c. Show that if two elements are consecutive in the sorted order and from different
         lists, then they must be compared.

      d. Use your answer to the previous part to show a lower bound of 2n  1 compar-
         isons for merging two sorted lists.

      8-7 The 0-1 sorting lemma and columnsort
      A compare-exchange operation on two array elements AŒi and AŒj , where i < j ,
      has the form

      C OMPARE -E XCHANGE .A; i; j /
      1 if AŒi > AŒj 
      2      exchange AŒi with AŒj 

      After the compare-exchange operation, we know that AŒi  AŒj .
         An oblivious compare-exchange algorithm operates solely by a sequence of
      prespeciﬁed compare-exchange operations. The indices of the positions compared
      in the sequence must be determined in advance, and although they can depend
      on the number of elements being sorted, they cannot depend on the values being
      sorted, nor can they depend on the result of any prior compare-exchange operation.
      For example, here is insertion sort expressed as an oblivious compare-exchange
      algorithm:

      I NSERTION -S ORT .A/
      1 for j D 2 to A:length
      2       for i D j  1 downto 1
      3            C OMPARE -E XCHANGE .A; i; i C 1/
