230   Part III Data Structures


      also have attributes that are manipulated by the set operations; these attributes may
      contain data or pointers to other objects in the set.
         Some dynamic sets presuppose that the keys are drawn from a totally ordered
      set, such as the real numbers, or the set of all words under the usual alphabetic
      ordering. A total ordering allows us to deﬁne the minimum element of the set, for
      example, or to speak of the next element larger than a given element in a set.

      Operations on dynamic sets
      Operations on a dynamic set can be grouped into two categories: queries, which
      simply return information about the set, and modifying operations, which change
      the set. Here is a list of typical operations. Any speciﬁc application will usually
      require only a few of these to be implemented.
      S EARCH .S; k/
         A query that, given a set S and a key value k, returns a pointer x to an element
         in S such that x:key D k, or NIL if no such element belongs to S.
      I NSERT .S; x/
          A modifying operation that augments the set S with the element pointed to
          by x. We usually assume that any attributes in element x needed by the set
          implementation have already been initialized.
      D ELETE .S; x/
         A modifying operation that, given a pointer x to an element in the set S, re-
         moves x from S. (Note that this operation takes a pointer to an element x, not
         a key value.)
      M INIMUM .S/
         A query on a totally ordered set S that returns a pointer to the element of S
         with the smallest key.
      M AXIMUM .S/
         A query on a totally ordered set S that returns a pointer to the element of S
         with the largest key.
      S UCCESSOR .S; x/
         A query that, given an element x whose key is from a totally ordered set S,
         returns a pointer to the next larger element in S, or NIL if x is the maximum
         element.
      P REDECESSOR .S; x/
         A query that, given an element x whose key is from a totally ordered set S,
         returns a pointer to the next smaller element in S, or NIL if x is the minimum
         element.
