536         Chapter 20 van Emde Boas Trees


            20.1-2
            Modify the data structures in this section to support keys that have associated satel-
            lite data.

            20.1-3
            Observe that, using the structures in this section, the way we ﬁnd the successor and
            predecessor of a value x does not depend on whether x is in the set at the time.
            Show how to ﬁnd the successor of x in a binary search tree when x is not stored in
            the tree.

            20.1-4                                                   p
            Suppose that instead of superimposing a tree of degree u, we were to superim-
            pose a tree of degree u1=k , where k > 1 is a constant. What would be the height of
            such a tree, and how long would each of the operations take?



20.2 A recursive structure
                                                                                           p
            In this section, we modify the idea of superimposing a tree of degree u p          on top of
            a bit vector. In the previous section, we used a summary p       structure of size   u, with
            each entry pointing to another stucture of size u. Now, we make the structure
            recursive, shrinking the universe size by the square root at each p      level of recursion.
            Starting with a universe of size u, we make structures holding u D u1=2 items,
            which themselves hold structures of u1=4 items, which hold structures of u1=8 items,
            and so on, down to a base size of 2.
                                                                              k
               For simplicity, in this section, we assume that u D 22 for some integer k, so
            that u; u1=2 ; u1=4 ; : : : are integers. This restriction would be quite severe in practice,
            allowing only values of u in the sequence 2; 4; 16; 256; 65536; : : :. We shall see in
            the next section how to relax this assumption and assume only that u D 2k for
            some integer k. Since the structure we examine in this section is only a precursor
            to the true van Emde Boas tree structure, we tolerate this restriction in favor of
            aiding our understanding.
               Recalling that our goal is to achieve running times of O.lg lg u/ for the oper-
            ations, let’s think about how we might obtain such running times. At the end of
            Section 4.3, we saw that by changing variables, we could show that the recurrence
                             p ˘
            T .n/ D 2T          n C lg n                                                          (20.1)
            has the solution T .n/ D O.lg n lg lg n/. Let’s consider a similar, but simpler,
            recurrence:
                        p
            T .u/ D T . u/ C O.1/ :                                                   (20.2)
