182   Chapter 7 Quicksort


      if we can count the total number of times that line 4 is executed, we can bound the
      total time spent in the for loop during the entire execution of Q UICKSORT.

      Lemma 7.1
      Let X be the number of comparisons performed in line 4 of PARTITION over the
      entire execution of Q UICKSORT on an n-element array. Then the running time of
      Q UICKSORT is O.n C X /.

      Proof By the discussion above, the algorithm makes at most n calls to PARTI -
      TION , each of which does a constant amount of work and then executes the for
      loop some number of times. Each iteration of the for loop executes line 4.

         Our goal, therefore, is to compute X , the total number of comparisons performed
      in all calls to PARTITION. We will not attempt to analyze how many comparisons
      are made in each call to PARTITION. Rather, we will derive an overall bound on the
      total number of comparisons. To do so, we must understand when the algorithm
      compares two elements of the array and when it does not. For ease of analysis, we
      rename the elements of the array A as ´1 ; ´2 ; : : : ; ´n , with ´i being the ith smallest
      element. We also deﬁne the set Zij D f´i ; ´i C1 ; : : : ; ´j g to be the set of elements
      between ´i and ´j , inclusive.
         When does the algorithm compare ´i and ´j ? To answer this question, we ﬁrst
      observe that each pair of elements is compared at most once. Why? Elements
      are compared only to the pivot element and, after a particular call of PARTITION
      ﬁnishes, the pivot element used in that call is never again compared to any other
      elements.
         Our analysis uses indicator random variables (see Section 5.2). We deﬁne
      Xij D I f´i is compared to ´j g ;
      where we are considering whether the comparison takes place at any time during
      the execution of the algorithm, not just during one iteration or one call of PARTI -
      TION . Since each pair is compared at most once, we can easily characterize the
      total number of comparisons performed by the algorithm:
            X
            n1 X
                n
      XD                   Xij :
            i D1 j Di C1

      Taking expectations of both sides, and then using linearity of expectation and
      Lemma 5.1, we obtain
                   " n1 n        #
                    X X
      E ŒX  D E              Xij
                           i D1 j Di C1
