1070   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness




             NP
                     NPC


               P




       Figure 34.6 How most theoretical computer scientists view the relationships among P, NP,
       and NPC. Both P and NPC are wholly contained within NP, and P \ NPC D ;.


       ered, a proof that a problem is NP-complete provides excellent evidence that it is
       intractable.

       Circuit satisﬁability
       We have deﬁned the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this point, we
       have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete. Once we prove that at
       least one problem is NP-complete, we can use polynomial-time reducibility as a
       tool to prove other problems to be NP-complete. Thus, we now focus on demon-
       strating the existence of an NP-complete problem: the circuit-satisﬁability prob-
       lem.
          Unfortunately, the formal proof that the circuit-satisﬁability problem is NP-
       complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text. Instead, we shall
       informally describe a proof that relies on a basic understanding of boolean combi-
       national circuits.
          Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational elements
       that are interconnected by wires. A boolean combinational element is any circuit
       element that has a constant number of boolean inputs and outputs and that performs
       a well-deﬁned function. Boolean values are drawn from the set f0; 1g, where 0
       represents FALSE and 1 represents TRUE.
          The boolean combinational elements that we use in the circuit-satisﬁability prob-
       lem compute simple boolean functions, and they are known as logic gates. Fig-
       ure 34.7 shows the three basic logic gates that we use in the circuit-satisﬁability
       problem: the NOT gate (or inverter), the AND gate, and the OR gate. The NOT
       gate takes a single binary input x, whose value is either 0 or 1, and produces a
       binary output ´ whose value is opposite that of the input value. Each of the other
       two gates takes two binary inputs x and y and produces a single binary output ´.
          We can describe the operation of each gate, and of any boolean combinational
       element, by a truth table, shown under each gate in Figure 34.7. A truth table gives
       the outputs of the combinational element for each possible setting of the inputs. For
