34.5 NP-complete problems                                                             1091


reduction: the graph G has a clique of size k if and only if the graph G has a vertex
cover of size jV j  k.
   Suppose that G has a clique V 0  V with jV 0 j D k. We claim that V  V 0 is a
vertex cover in G. Let .u; / be any edge in E. Then, .u; / 62 E, which implies
that at least one of u or  does not belong to V 0 , since every pair of vertices in V 0 is
connected by an edge of E. Equivalently, at least one of u or  is in V  V 0 , which
means that edge .u; / is covered by V  V 0 . Since .u; / was chosen arbitrarily
from E, every edge of E is covered by a vertex in V  V 0 . Hence, the set V  V 0 ,
which has size jV j  k, forms a vertex cover for G.
   Conversely, suppose that G has a vertex cover V 0  V , where jV 0 j D jV j  k.
Then, for all u;  2 V , if .u; / 2 E, then u 2 V 0 or  2 V 0 or both. The
contrapositive of this implication is that for all u;  2 V , if u 62 V 0 and  62 V 0 ,
then .u; / 2 E. In other words, V V 0 is a clique, and it has size jV jjV 0 j D k.

   Since VERTEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don’t expect to ﬁnd a polynomial-
time algorithm for ﬁnding a minimum-size vertex cover. Section 35.1 presents a
polynomial-time “approximation algorithm,” however, which produces “approxi-
mate” solutions for the vertex-cover problem. The size of a vertex cover produced
by the algorithm is at most twice the minimum size of a vertex cover.
   Thus, we shouldn’t give up hope just because a problem is NP-complete. We
may be able to design a polynomial-time approximation algorithm that obtains
near-optimal solutions, even though ﬁnding an optimal solution is NP-complete.
Chapter 35 gives several approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems.

34.5.3   The hamiltonian-cycle problem
We now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem deﬁned in Section 34.2.

Theorem 34.13
The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.

Proof We ﬁrst show that HAM-CYCLE belongs to NP. Given a graph G D
.V; E/, our certiﬁcate is the sequence of jV j vertices that makes up the hamiltonian
cycle. The veriﬁcation algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex
in V exactly once and that with the ﬁrst vertex repeated at the end, it forms a cycle
in G. That is, it checks that there is an edge between each pair of consecutive
vertices and between the ﬁrst and last vertices. We can verify the certiﬁcate in
polynomial time.
   We now prove that VERTEX-COVER P HAM-CYCLE, which shows that
HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete. Given an undirected graph G D .V; E/ and an
