1026   Chapter 33 Computational Geometry



                                               e
           a                       d



                           c
                                                          f
                   b

       a       a       a       d       d   e
               b       c       a       c   d
                       b       c       b   c
                               b           b
                                                   time



       Figure 33.5 The execution of A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT . Each dashed line is the sweep line at
       an event point. Except for the rightmost sweep line, the ordering of segment names below each sweep
       line corresponds to the total preorder T at the end of the for loop processing the corresponding event
       point. The rightmost sweep line occurs when processing the right endpoint of segment c; because
       segments d and b surround c and intersect each other, the procedure returns TRUE .


       Correctness
       To show that A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT is correct, we will prove that the call
       A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT .S/ returns TRUE if and only if there is an intersec-
       tion among the segments in S.
          It is easy to see that A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT returns TRUE (on lines 7
       and 10) only if it ﬁnds an intersection between two of the input segments. Hence,
       if it returns TRUE, there is an intersection.
          We also need to show the converse: that if there is an intersection, then A NY-
       S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT returns TRUE. Let us suppose that there is at least one
       intersection. Let p be the leftmost intersection point, breaking ties by choosing the
       point with the lowest y-coordinate, and let a and b be the segments that intersect
       at p. Since no intersections occur to the left of p, the order given by T is correct at
       all points to the left of p. Because no three segments intersect at the same point, a
       and b become consecutive in the total preorder at some sweep line ´.2 Moreover,
       ´ is to the left of p or goes through p. Some segment endpoint q on sweep line ´


       2 If we allow three segments to intersect at the same point, there may be an intervening segment c that

       intersects both a and b at point p. That is, we may have a <w c and c <w b for all sweep lines w to
       the left of p for which a <w b. Exercise 33.2-8 asks you to show that A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT
       is correct even if three segments do intersect at the same point.
