1058   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


       tations of prime numbers. We denote the empty string by ", the empty language
       by ;, and the language of all strings over † by † . For example, if † D f0; 1g,
       then † D f"; 0; 1; 00; 01; 10; 11; 000; : : :g is the set of all binary strings. Every
       language L over † is a subset of † .
          We can perform a variety of operations on languages. Set-theoretic operations,
       such as union and intersection, follow directly from the set-theoretic deﬁnitions.
       We deﬁne the complement of L by L D †  L. The concatenation L1 L2 of two
       languages L1 and L2 is the language
       L D fx1 x2 W x1 2 L1 and x2 2 L2 g :
       The closure or Kleene star of a language L is the language
       L D f"g [ L [ L2 [ L3 [    ;
       where Lk is the language obtained by concatenating L to itself k times.
          From the point of view of language theory, the set of instances for any decision
       problem Q is simply the set † , where † D f0; 1g. Since Q is entirely character-
       ized by those problem instances that produce a 1 (yes) answer, we can view Q as
       a language L over † D f0; 1g, where
       L D fx 2 † W Q.x/ D 1g :
       For example, the decision problem PATH has the corresponding language
       PATH D fhG; u; ; ki W G D .V; E/ is an undirected graph,
                              u;  2 V;
                              k  0 is an integer, and
                              there exists a path from u to  in G
                              consisting of at most k edgesg :
       (Where convenient, we shall sometimes use the same name—PATH in this case—
       to refer to both a decision problem and its corresponding language.)
          The formal-language framework allows us to express concisely the relation be-
       tween decision problems and algorithms that solve them. We say that an al-
       gorithm A accepts a string x 2 f0; 1g if, given input x, the algorithm’s out-
       put A.x/ is 1. The language accepted by an algorithm A is the set of strings
       L D fx 2 f0; 1g W A.x/ D 1g, that is, the set of strings that the algorithm accepts.
       An algorithm A rejects a string x if A.x/ D 0.
          Even if language L is accepted by an algorithm A, the algorithm will not neces-
       sarily reject a string x 62 L provided as input to it. For example, the algorithm may
       loop forever. A language L is decided by an algorithm A if every binary string
       in L is accepted by A and every binary string not in L is rejected by A. A lan-
       guage L is accepted in polynomial time by an algorithm A if it is accepted by A
       and if in addition there exists a constant k such that for any length-n string x 2 L,
