406   Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming


      words of lengths l1 ; l2 ; : : : ; ln , measured in characters. We want to print this para-
      graph neatly on a number of lines that hold a maximum of M characters each. Our
      criterion of “neatness” is as follows. If a given line contains words i through j ,
      where i  j , and we leave exactly one space between words,      Pj the number of extra
      space characters at the end of the line is M  j C i  kDi lk , which must be
      nonnegative so that the words ﬁt on the line. We wish to minimize the sum, over
      all lines except the last, of the cubes of the numbers of extra space characters at the
      ends of lines. Give a dynamic-programming algorithm to print a paragraph of n
      words neatly on a printer. Analyze the running time and space requirements of
      your algorithm.

      15-5 Edit distance
      In order to transform one source string of text xŒ1 : : m to a target string yŒ1 : : n,
      we can perform various transformation operations. Our goal is, given x and y,
      to produce a series of transformations that change x to y. We use an ar-
      ray ´—assumed to be large enough to hold all the characters it will need—to hold
      the intermediate results. Initially, ´ is empty, and at termination, we should have
      ´Œj  D yŒj  for j D 1; 2; : : : ; n. We maintain current indices i into x and j into ´,
      and the operations are allowed to alter ´ and these indices. Initially, i D j D 1.
      We are required to examine every character in x during the transformation, which
      means that at the end of the sequence of transformation operations, we must have
      i D m C 1.
         We may choose from among six transformation operations:
      Copy a character from x to ´ by setting ´Œj  D xŒi and then incrementing both i
        and j . This operation examines xŒi.
      Replace a character from x by another character c, by setting ´Œj  D c, and then
        incrementing both i and j . This operation examines xŒi.
      Delete a character from x by incrementing i but leaving j alone. This operation
         examines xŒi.
      Insert the character c into ´ by setting ´Œj  D c and then incrementing j , but
         leaving i alone. This operation examines no characters of x.
      Twiddle (i.e., exchange) the next two characters by copying them from x to ´ but
        in the opposite order; we do so by setting ´Œj  D xŒi C 1 and ´Œj C 1 D xŒi
        and then setting i D i C 2 and j D j C 2. This operation examines xŒi
        and xŒi C 1.
      Kill the remainder of x by setting i D m C 1. This operation examines all char-
         acters in x that have not yet been examined. This operation, if performed, must
         be the ﬁnal operation.
