33.2 Determining whether any pair of segments intersects                           1027


is the event point at which a and b become consecutive in the total preorder. If p
is on sweep line ´, then q D p. If p is not on sweep line ´, then q is to the left
of p. In either case, the order given by T is correct just before encountering q.
(Here is where we use the lexicographic order in which the algorithm processes
event points. Because p is the lowest of the leftmost intersection points, even if p
is on sweep line ´ and some other intersection point p 0 is on ´, event point q D p
is processed before the other intersection p 0 can interfere with the total preorder T .
Moreover, even if p is the left endpoint of one segment, say a, and the right end-
point of the other segment, say b, because left endpoint events occur before right
endpoint events, segment b is in T upon ﬁrst encountering segment a.) Either event
point q is processed by A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT or it is not processed.
   If q is processed by A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT, only two possible actions
may occur:
1. Either a or b is inserted into T , and the other segment is above or below it in
   the total preorder. Lines 4–7 detect this case.
2. Segments a and b are already in T , and a segment between them in the total
   preorder is deleted, making a and b become consecutive. Lines 8–11 detect this
   case.
In either case, we ﬁnd the intersection p and A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT returns
TRUE.
   If event point q is not processed by A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT, the proce-
dure must have returned before processing all event points. This situation could
have occurred only if A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT had already found an inter-
section and returned TRUE.
   Thus, if there is an intersection, A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT returns TRUE.
As we have already seen, if A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT returns TRUE, there is
an intersection. Therefore, A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT always returns a correct
answer.

Running time
If set S contains n segments, then A NY-S EGMENTS -I NTERSECT runs in time
O.n lg n/. Line 1 takes O.1/ time. Line 2 takes O.n lg n/ time, using merge
sort or heapsort. The for loop of lines 3–11 iterates at most once per event point,
and so with 2n event points, the loop iterates at most 2n times. Each iteration takes
O.lg n/ time, since each red-black-tree operation takes O.lg n/ time and, using the
method of Section 33.1, each intersection test takes O.1/ time. The total time is
thus O.n lg n/.
