118          Chapter 5 Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms


             and 1 with probability 1=2. What is the expected running time of your algorithm
             as a function of p?



5.2   Indicator random variables

             In order to analyze many algorithms, including the hiring problem, we use indicator
             random variables. Indicator random variables provide a convenient method for
             converting between probabilities and expectations. Suppose we are given a sample
             space S and an event A. Then the indicator random variable I fAg associated with
             event A is deﬁned as
                      (
                         1 if A occurs ;
             I fAg D                                                                       (5.1)
                         0 if A does not occur :

                As a simple example, let us determine the expected number of heads that we
             obtain when ﬂipping a fair coin. Our sample space is S D fH; T g, with Pr fH g D
             Pr fT g D 1=2. We can then deﬁne an indicator random variable XH , associated
             with the coin coming up heads, which is the event H . This variable counts the
             number of heads obtained in this ﬂip, and it is 1 if the coin comes up heads and 0
             otherwise. We write
             XH    D I fH g
                     (
                        1 if H occurs ;
                   D
                        0 if T occurs :

             The expected number of heads obtained in one ﬂip of the coin is simply the ex-
             pected value of our indicator variable XH :
             E ŒXH  D      E ŒI fH g
                     D      1  Pr fH g C 0  Pr fT g
                     D      1  .1=2/ C 0  .1=2/
                     D      1=2 :
             Thus the expected number of heads obtained by one ﬂip of a fair coin is 1=2. As
             the following lemma shows, the expected value of an indicator random variable
             associated with an event A is equal to the probability that A occurs.

             Lemma 5.1
             Given a sample space S and an event A in the sample space S, let XA D I fAg.
             Then E ŒXA  D Pr fAg.
