6.1 Heaps                                                                        153


values no larger than that contained at the node itself. A min-heap is organized in
the opposite way; the min-heap property is that for every node i other than the
root,
AŒPARENT.i/  AŒi :
The smallest element in a min-heap is at the root.
   For the heapsort algorithm, we use max-heaps. Min-heaps commonly imple-
ment priority queues, which we discuss in Section 6.5. We shall be precise in
specifying whether we need a max-heap or a min-heap for any particular applica-
tion, and when properties apply to either max-heaps or min-heaps, we just use the
term “heap.”
   Viewing a heap as a tree, we deﬁne the height of a node in a heap to be the
number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the node to a leaf, and
we deﬁne the height of the heap to be the height of its root. Since a heap of n ele-
ments is based on a complete binary tree, its height is ‚.lg n/ (see Exercise 6.1-2).
We shall see that the basic operations on heaps run in time at most proportional
to the height of the tree and thus take O.lg n/ time. The remainder of this chapter
presents some basic procedures and shows how they are used in a sorting algorithm
and a priority-queue data structure.
   The M AX -H EAPIFY procedure, which runs in O.lg n/ time, is the key to main-
    taining the max-heap property.
   The B UILD -M AX -H EAP procedure, which runs in linear time, produces a max-
    heap from an unordered input array.
   The H EAPSORT procedure, which runs in O.n lg n/ time, sorts an array in
    place.
   The M AX -H EAP -I NSERT, H EAP -E XTRACT-M AX, H EAP -I NCREASE -K EY,
    and H EAP -M AXIMUM procedures, which run in O.lg n/ time, allow the heap
    data structure to implement a priority queue.

Exercises

6.1-1
What are the minimum and maximum numbers of elements in a heap of height h?

6.1-2
Show that an n-element heap has height blg nc.

6.1-3
Show that in any subtree of a max-heap, the root of the subtree contains the largest
value occurring anywhere in that subtree.
