29.3 The simplex algorithm                                                       877


   Consider the system of equations formed by subtracting each equation in
line (29.82) from the corresponding equation in line (29.80). The resulting sys-
tem is
                  X
0 D .bi  bi0 /    .aij  aij0 /xj for i 2 B
                 j 2N

or, equivalently,
X                           X
     aij xj D .bi  bi0 / C   aij0 xj for i 2 B :
j 2N                         j 2N

Now, for each i 2 B, apply Lemma 29.3 with ˛j D aij , ˇj D aij0 , D bi  bi0 , and
I D N . Since ˛i D ˇi , we have that aij D aij0 for each j 2 N , and since D 0,
we have that bi D bi0 . Thus, for the two slack forms, A and b are identical to A0
and b 0 . Using a similar argument, Exercise 29.3-1 shows that it must also be the
case that c D c 0 and  D  0 , and hence that the slack forms must be identical.

  We can now show that cycling is the only possible reason that S IMPLEX might
not terminate.

Lemma 29.5
If S IMPLEX fails to terminate in at most nCm
                                           m
                                              iterations, then it cycles.

Proof By Lemma 29.4, the set B of basic variables uniquely determines a slack
form. There are n C m variables and jBj D m, and therefore, there are at most
 nCm
  m
      ways to choose B. Thus, there are only at most nCmm
                                                              unique slack forms.
Therefore, if S IMPLEX runs for more than nCm
                                           m
                                               iterations, it must cycle.

   Cycling is theoretically possible, but extremely rare. We can prevent it by choos-
ing the entering and leaving variables somewhat more carefully. One option is to
perturb the input slightly so that it is impossible to have two solutions with the
same objective value. Another option is to break ties by always choosing the vari-
able with the smallest index, a strategy known as Bland’s rule. We omit the proof
that these strategies avoid cycling.

Lemma 29.6
If lines 4 and 9 of S IMPLEX always break ties by choosing the variable with the
smallest index, then S IMPLEX must terminate.

   We conclude this section with the following lemma.
