28.3 Symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrices and least-squares approximation                 835


Corollary 28.6
LU decomposition of a symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrix never causes a division
by 0.

Proof Let A be a symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrix. We shall prove something
stronger than the statement of the corollary: every pivot is strictly positive. The ﬁrst
pivot is a11 . Let e1 be the ﬁrst unit vector, from which we obtain a11 D e1T Ae1 > 0.
Since the ﬁrst step of LU decomposition produces the Schur complement of A
with respect to A1 D .a11 /, Lemma 28.5 implies by induction that all pivots are
positive.

Least-squares approximation
One important application of symmetric positive-deﬁnite matrices arises in ﬁtting
curves to given sets of data points. Suppose that we are given a set of m data points
.x1 ; y1 /; .x2 ; y2 /; : : : ; .xm ; ym / ;
where we know that the yi are subject to measurement errors. We would like to
determine a function F .x/ such that the approximation errors
i D F .xi /  yi                                                                   (28.17)
are small for i D 1; 2; : : : ; m. The form of the function F depends on the problem
at hand. Here, we assume that it has the form of a linearly weighted sum,
           X
           n
F .x/ D           cj fj .x/ ;
           j D1

where the number of summands n and the speciﬁc basis functions fj are chosen
based on knowledge of the problem at hand. A common choice is fj .x/ D x j 1 ,
which means that
F .x/ D c1 C c2 x C c3 x 2 C    C cn x n1
is a polynomial of degree n  1 in x. Thus, given m data points .x1 ; y1 /; .x2 ; y2 /;
: : : ; .xm ; ym /, we wish to calculate n coefﬁcients c1 ; c2 ; : : : ; cn that minimize the
approximation errors 1 ; 2 ; : : : ; m .
    By choosing n D m, we can calculate each yi exactly in equation (28.17). Such
a high-degree F “ﬁts the noise” as well as the data, however, and generally gives
poor results when used to predict y for previously unseen values of x. It is usu-
ally better to choose n signiﬁcantly smaller than m and hope that by choosing the
coefﬁcients cj well, we can obtain a function F that ﬁnds the signiﬁcant patterns
in the data points without paying undue attention to the noise. Some theoretical
