1110   Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms


       endpoints u and  to C , and deletes all edges in E 0 that are covered by either u
       or . Finally, line 7 returns the vertex cover C . The running time of this algorithm
       is O.V C E/, using adjacency lists to represent E 0 .

       Theorem 35.1
       A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm.

       Proof We have already shown that A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER runs in polyno-
       mial time.
          The set C of vertices that is returned by A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER is a vertex
       cover, since the algorithm loops until every edge in G:E has been covered by some
       vertex in C .
          To see that A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER returns a vertex cover that is at most twice
       the size of an optimal cover, let A denote the set of edges that line 4 of A PPROX -
       V ERTEX -C OVER picked. In order to cover the edges in A, any vertex cover—in
       particular, an optimal cover C  —must include at least one endpoint of each edge
       in A. No two edges in A share an endpoint, since once an edge is picked in line 4,
       all other edges that are incident on its endpoints are deleted from E 0 in line 6. Thus,
       no two edges in A are covered by the same vertex from C  , and we have the lower
       bound
       jC  j  jAj                                                                     (35.2)
       on the size of an optimal vertex cover. Each execution of line 4 picks an edge for
       which neither of its endpoints is already in C , yielding an upper bound (an exact
       upper bound, in fact) on the size of the vertex cover returned:
       jC j D 2 jAj :                                                                   (35.3)
       Combining equations (35.2) and (35.3), we obtain
       jC j D 2 jAj
             2 jC  j ;
       thereby proving the theorem.

          Let us reﬂect on this proof. At ﬁrst, you might wonder how we can possibly
       prove that the size of the vertex cover returned by A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER is at
       most twice the size of an optimal vertex cover, when we do not even know the size
       of an optimal vertex cover. Instead of requiring that we know the exact size of an
       optimal vertex cover, we rely on a lower bound on the size. As Exercise 35.1-2 asks
       you to show, the set A of edges that line 4 of A PPROX -V ERTEX -C OVER selects is
       actually a maximal matching in the graph G. (A maximal matching is a matching
       that is not a proper subset of any other matching.) The size of a maximal matching
