26.5 The relabel-to-front algorithm                                                   755


R ELABEL -T O -F RONT .G; s; t/
 1 I NITIALIZE -P REFLOW .G; s/
 2 L D G:V  fs; tg, in any order
 3 for each vertex u 2 G:V  fs; tg
 4      u:current D u:N:head
 5 u D L:head
 6 while u ¤ NIL
 7      old-height D u:h
 8      D ISCHARGE .u/
 9      if u:h > old-height
10           move u to the front of list L
11      u D u:next

   The relabel-to-front algorithm works as follows. Line 1 initializes the preﬂow
and heights to the same values as in the generic push-relabel algorithm. Line 2
initializes the list L to contain all potentially overﬂowing vertices, in any order.
Lines 3–4 initialize the current pointer of each vertex u to the ﬁrst vertex in u’s
neighbor list.
   As Figure 26.10 illustrates, the while loop of lines 6–11 runs through the list L,
discharging vertices. Line 5 makes it start with the ﬁrst vertex in the list. Each
time through the loop, line 8 discharges a vertex u. If u was relabeled by the
D ISCHARGE procedure, line 10 moves it to the front of list L. We can determine
whether u was relabeled by comparing its height before the discharge operation,
saved into the variable old-height in line 7, with its height afterward, in line 9.
Line 11 makes the next iteration of the while loop use the vertex following u in
list L. If line 10 moved u to the front of the list, the vertex used in the next iteration
is the one following u in its new position in the list.
   To show that R ELABEL -T O -F RONT computes a maximum ﬂow, we shall show
that it is an implementation of the generic push-relabel algorithm. First, ob-
serve that it performs push and relabel operations only when they apply, since
Lemma 26.29 guarantees that D ISCHARGE performs them only when they apply.
It remains to show that when R ELABEL -T O -F RONT terminates, no basic opera-
tions apply. The remainder of the correctness argument relies on the following
loop invariant:

   At each test in line 6 of R ELABEL -T O -F RONT, list L is a topological sort
   of the vertices in the admissible network Gf;h D .V; Ef;h /, and no vertex
   before u in the list has excess ﬂow.

Initialization: Immediately after I NITIALIZE -P REFLOW has been run, s:h D jV j
   and :h D 0 for all  2 V  fsg. Since jV j  2 (because V contains at
