1064   Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


       The complexity class NP
       The complexity class NP is the class of languages that can be veriﬁed by a poly-
       nomial-time algorithm.8 More precisely, a language L belongs to NP if and only if
       there exist a two-input polynomial-time algorithm A and a constant c such that
       L D fx 2 f0; 1g W there exists a certiﬁcate y with jyj D O.jxjc /
                          such that A.x; y/ D 1g :
       We say that algorithm A veriﬁes language L in polynomial time.
          From our earlier discussion on the hamiltonian-cycle problem, we now see that
       HAM-CYCLE 2 NP. (It is always nice to know that an important set is nonempty.)
       Moreover, if L 2 P, then L 2 NP, since if there is a polynomial-time algorithm
       to decide L, the algorithm can be easily converted to a two-argument veriﬁcation
       algorithm that simply ignores any certiﬁcate and accepts exactly those input strings
       it determines to be in L. Thus, P  NP.
          It is unknown whether P D NP, but most researchers believe that P and NP are
       not the same class. Intuitively, the class P consists of problems that can be solved
       quickly. The class NP consists of problems for which a solution can be veriﬁed
       quickly. You may have learned from experience that it is often more difﬁcult to
       solve a problem from scratch than to verify a clearly presented solution, especially
       when working under time constraints. Theoretical computer scientists generally
       believe that this analogy extends to the classes P and NP, and thus that NP includes
       languages that are not in P.
          There is more compelling, though not conclusive, evidence that P ¤ NP—the
       existence of languages that are “NP-complete.” We shall study this class in Sec-
       tion 34.3.
          Many other fundamental questions beyond the P ¤ NP question remain unre-
       solved. Figure 34.3 shows some possible scenarios. Despite much work by many
       researchers, no one even knows whether the class NP is closed under comple-
       ment. That is, does L 2 NP imply L 2 NP? We can deﬁne the complexity class
       co-NP as the set of languages L such that L 2 NP. We can restate the question
       of whether NP is closed under complement as whether NP D co-NP. Since P is
       closed under complement (Exercise 34.1-6), it follows from Exercise 34.2-9 that
       P  NP \ co-NP. Once again, however, no one knows whether P D NP \ co-NP
       or whether there is some language in NP \ co-NP  P.


       8 The name “NP” stands for “nondeterministic polynomial time.” The class NP was originally studied

       in the context of nondeterminism, but this book uses the somewhat simpler yet equivalent notion of
       veriﬁcation. Hopcroft and Ullman [180] give a good presentation of NP-completeness in terms of
       nondeterministic models of computation.
