2.3 Designing algorithms                                                           37


   Figure 2.5 shows how we can solve recurrence (2.2). For convenience, we as-
sume that n is an exact power of 2. Part (a) of the ﬁgure shows T .n/, which we
expand in part (b) into an equivalent tree representing the recurrence. The cn term
is the root (the cost incurred at the top level of recursion), and the two subtrees of
the root are the two smaller recurrences T .n=2/. Part (c) shows this process carried
one step further by expanding T .n=2/. The cost incurred at each of the two sub-
nodes at the second level of recursion is cn=2. We continue expanding each node
in the tree by breaking it into its constituent parts as determined by the recurrence,
until the problem sizes get down to 1, each with a cost of c. Part (d) shows the
resulting recursion tree.
   Next, we add the costs across each level of the tree. The top level has total
cost cn, the next level down has total cost c.n=2/ C c.n=2/ D cn, the level after
that has total cost c.n=4/Cc.n=4/ Cc.n=4/Cc.n=4/ D cn, and so on. In general,
the level i below the top has 2i nodes, each contributing a cost of c.n=2i /, so that
the ith level below the top has total cost 2i c.n=2i / D cn. The bottom level has n
nodes, each contributing a cost of c, for a total cost of cn.
   The total number of levels of the recursion tree in Figure 2.5 is lg n C 1, where
n is the number of leaves, corresponding to the input size. An informal inductive
argument justiﬁes this claim. The base case occurs when n D 1, in which case the
tree has only one level. Since lg 1 D 0, we have that lg n C 1 gives the correct
number of levels. Now assume as an inductive hypothesis that the number of levels
of a recursion tree with 2i leaves is lg 2i C 1 D i C 1 (since for any value of i,
we have that lg 2i D i). Because we are assuming that the input size is a power
of 2, the next input size to consider is 2i C1 . A tree with n D 2i C1 leaves has
one more level than a tree with 2i leaves, and so the total number of levels is
.i C 1/ C 1 D lg 2i C1 C 1.
   To compute the total cost represented by the recurrence (2.2), we simply add up
the costs of all the levels. The recursion tree has lg n C 1 levels, each costing cn,
for a total cost of cn.lg n C 1/ D cn lg n C cn. Ignoring the low-order term and
the constant c gives the desired result of ‚.n lg n/.

Exercises

2.3-1
Using Figure 2.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of merge sort on the array
A D h3; 41; 52; 26; 38; 57; 9; 49i.

2.3-2
Rewrite the M ERGE procedure so that it does not use sentinels, instead stopping
once either array L or R has had all its elements copied back to A and then copying
the remainder of the other array back into A.
