70   Chapter 4 Divide-and-Conquer


         1   2   3   4   5    6   7    8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
     A 13 –3 –25 20 –3 –16 –23 18 20 –7 12 –5 –22 15 –4                      7

                                      maximum subarray

     Figure 4.3 The change in stock prices as a maximum-subarray problem. Here, the subar-
     ray AŒ8 : : 11, with sum 43, has the greatest sum of any contiguous subarray of array A.


     that although computing the cost of one subarray might take time proportional to
     the length of the subarray, when computing all ‚.n2 / subarray sums, we can orga-
     nize the computation so that each subarray sum takes O.1/ time, given the values
     of previously computed subarray sums, so that the brute-force solution takes ‚.n2 /
     time.
        So let us seek a more efﬁcient solution to the maximum-subarray problem.
     When doing so, we will usually speak of “a” maximum subarray rather than “the”
     maximum subarray, since there could be more than one subarray that achieves the
     maximum sum.
        The maximum-subarray problem is interesting only when the array contains
     some negative numbers. If all the array entries were nonnegative, then the
     maximum-subarray problem would present no challenge, since the entire array
     would give the greatest sum.

     A solution using divide-and-conquer
     Let’s think about how we might solve the maximum-subarray problem using
     the divide-and-conquer technique. Suppose we want to ﬁnd a maximum subar-
     ray of the subarray AŒlow : : high. Divide-and-conquer suggests that we divide
     the subarray into two subarrays of as equal size as possible. That is, we ﬁnd
     the midpoint, say mid, of the subarray, and consider the subarrays AŒlow : : mid
     and AŒmid C 1 : : high. As Figure 4.4(a) shows, any contiguous subarray AŒi : : j 
     of AŒlow : : high must lie in exactly one of the following places:
        entirely in the subarray AŒlow : : mid, so that low  i  j  mid,
        entirely in the subarray AŒmid C 1 : : high, so that mid < i  j  high, or
        crossing the midpoint, so that low  i  mid < j  high.
     Therefore, a maximum subarray of AŒlow : : high must lie in exactly one of these
     places. In fact, a maximum subarray of AŒlow : : high must have the greatest
     sum over all subarrays entirely in AŒlow : : mid, entirely in AŒmid C 1 : : high,
     or crossing the midpoint. We can ﬁnd maximum subarrays of AŒlow : : mid and
     AŒmidC1 : : high recursively, because these two subproblems are smaller instances
     of the problem of ﬁnding a maximum subarray. Thus, all that is left to do is ﬁnd a
