Problems for Chapter 19                                                            529


   the binomial heap (or in the case of the U NION operation, in the two binomial
   heaps that are being united). The M AKE -H EAP operation should take constant
   time.

d. Suppose that we were to implement only the mergeable-heap operations on a
   Fibonacci heap (i.e., we do not implement the D ECREASE -K EY or D ELETE op-
   erations). How would the trees in a Fibonacci heap resemble those in a binomial
   heap? How would they differ? Show that the maximum degree in an n-node
   Fibonacci heap would be at most blg nc.

e. Professor McGee has devised a new data structure based on Fibonacci heaps.
   A McGee heap has the same structure as a Fibonacci heap and supports just
   the mergeable-heap operations. The implementations of the operations are the
   same as for Fibonacci heaps, except that insertion and union consolidate the
   root list as their last step. What are the worst-case running times of operations
   on McGee heaps?

19-3 More Fibonacci-heap operations
We wish to augment a Fibonacci heap H to support two new operations without
changing the amortized running time of any other Fibonacci-heap operations.

a. The operation F IB -H EAP -C HANGE -K EY .H; x; k/ changes the key of node x
   to the value k. Give an efﬁcient implementation of F IB -H EAP -C HANGE -K EY,
   and analyze the amortized running time of your implementation for the cases
   in which k is greater than, less than, or equal to x:key.

b. Give an efﬁcient implementation of F IB -H EAP -P RUNE .H; r/, which deletes
   q D min.r; H:n/ nodes from H . You may choose any q nodes to delete. Ana-
   lyze the amortized running time of your implementation. (Hint: You may need
   to modify the data structure and potential function.)

19-4 2-3-4 heaps
Chapter 18 introduced the 2-3-4 tree, in which every internal node (other than pos-
sibly the root) has two, three, or four children and all leaves have the same depth. In
this problem, we shall implement 2-3-4 heaps, which support the mergeable-heap
operations.
   The 2-3-4 heaps differ from 2-3-4 trees in the following ways. In 2-3-4 heaps,
only leaves store keys, and each leaf x stores exactly one key in the attribute x:key.
The keys in the leaves may appear in any order. Each internal node x contains
a value x:small that is equal to the smallest key stored in any leaf in the subtree
rooted at x. The root r contains an attribute r:height that gives the height of the
