2.1 Insertion sort                                                                17




                    ♣♣    ♣
                           7

                    ♣
                   ♣♣
             5♣ ♣
          4 ♣♣  ♣♣ ♣
                10
          ♣
          ♣
                ♣♣
                0
                   ♣♣
                  5♣   ♣♣       7
               ♣♣ ♣ 4 2♣
        2
        ♣         ♣
                  ♣
                               ♣
                 ♣ ♣♣ ♣
                 ♣♣            1




Figure 2.1 Sorting a hand of cards using insertion sort.


reading our algorithms. What separates pseudocode from “real” code is that in
pseudocode, we employ whatever expressive method is most clear and concise to
specify a given algorithm. Sometimes, the clearest method is English, so do not
be surprised if you come across an English phrase or sentence embedded within
a section of “real” code. Another difference between pseudocode and real code
is that pseudocode is not typically concerned with issues of software engineering.
Issues of data abstraction, modularity, and error handling are often ignored in order
to convey the essence of the algorithm more concisely.
   We start with insertion sort, which is an efﬁcient algorithm for sorting a small
number of elements. Insertion sort works the way many people sort a hand of
playing cards. We start with an empty left hand and the cards face down on the
table. We then remove one card at a time from the table and insert it into the
correct position in the left hand. To ﬁnd the correct position for a card, we compare
it with each of the cards already in the hand, from right to left, as illustrated in
Figure 2.1. At all times, the cards held in the left hand are sorted, and these cards
were originally the top cards of the pile on the table.
   We present our pseudocode for insertion sort as a procedure called I NSERTION -
S ORT, which takes as a parameter an array AŒ1 : : n containing a sequence of
length n that is to be sorted. (In the code, the number n of elements in A is denoted
by A:length.) The algorithm sorts the input numbers in place: it rearranges the
numbers within the array A, with at most a constant number of them stored outside
the array at any time. The input array A contains the sorted output sequence when
the I NSERTION -S ORT procedure is ﬁnished.
