468   Chapter 17 Amortized Analysis


      We assume that we measure the cost in terms of elementary insertions and dele-
      tions.
         You might think that we should double the table size upon inserting an item into
      a full table and halve the size when a deleting an item would cause the table to
      become less than half full. This strategy would guarantee that the load factor of
      the table never drops below 1=2, but unfortunately, it can cause the amortized cost
      of an operation to be quite large. Consider the following scenario. We perform n
      operations on a table T , where n is an exact power of 2. The ﬁrst n=2 operations are
      insertions, which by our previous analysis cost a total of ‚.n/. At the end of this
      sequence of insertions, T:num D T:size D n=2. For the second n=2 operations,
      we perform the following sequence:
         insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, . . . .
      The ﬁrst insertion causes the table to expand to size n. The two following deletions
      cause the table to contract back to size n=2. Two further insertions cause another
      expansion, and so forth. The cost of each expansion and contraction is ‚.n/, and
      there are ‚.n/ of them. Thus, the total cost of the n operations is ‚.n2 /, making
      the amortized cost of an operation ‚.n/.
         The downside of this strategy is obvious: after expanding the table, we do not
      delete enough items to pay for a contraction. Likewise, after contracting the table,
      we do not insert enough items to pay for an expansion.
         We can improve upon this strategy by allowing the load factor of the table to
      drop below 1=2. Speciﬁcally, we continue to double the table size upon inserting
      an item into a full table, but we halve the table size when deleting an item causes
      the table to become less than 1=4 full, rather than 1=2 full as before. The load
      factor of the table is therefore bounded below by the constant 1=4.
         Intuitively, we would consider a load factor of 1=2 to be ideal, and the table’s
      potential would then be 0. As the load factor deviates from 1=2, the potential
      increases so that by the time we expand or contract the table, the table has garnered
      sufﬁcient potential to pay for copying all the items into the newly allocated table.
      Thus, we will need a potential function that has grown to T:num by the time that
      the load factor has either increased to 1 or decreased to 1=4. After either expanding
      or contracting the table, the load factor goes back to 1=2 and the table’s potential
      reduces back to 0.
         We omit the code for TABLE -D ELETE, since it is analogous to TABLE -I NSERT.
      For our analysis, we shall assume that whenever the number of items in the table
      drops to 0, we free the storage for the table. That is, if T:num D 0, then T:size D 0.
         We can now use the potential method to analyze the cost of a sequence of n
      TABLE -I NSERT and TABLE -D ELETE operations. We start by deﬁning a poten-
      tial function ˆ that is 0 immediately after an expansion or contraction and builds
      as the load factor increases to 1 or decreases to 1=4. Let us denote the load fac-
