xiv   Preface


         You should ﬁnd it easy to organize your course around just the chapters you
      need. We have made chapters relatively self-contained, so that you need not worry
      about an unexpected and unnecessary dependence of one chapter on another. Each
      chapter presents the easier material ﬁrst and the more difﬁcult material later, with
      section boundaries marking natural stopping points. In an undergraduate course,
      you might use only the earlier sections from a chapter; in a graduate course, you
      might cover the entire chapter.
         We have included 957 exercises and 158 problems. Each section ends with exer-
      cises, and each chapter ends with problems. The exercises are generally short ques-
      tions that test basic mastery of the material. Some are simple self-check thought
      exercises, whereas others are more substantial and are suitable as assigned home-
      work. The problems are more elaborate case studies that often introduce new ma-
      terial; they often consist of several questions that lead the student through the steps
      required to arrive at a solution.
         Departing from our practice in previous editions of this book, we have made
      publicly available solutions to some, but by no means all, of the problems and ex-
      ercises. Our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to these solutions.
      You will want to check this site to make sure that it does not contain the solution to
      an exercise or problem that you plan to assign. We expect the set of solutions that
      we post to grow slowly over time, so you will need to check it each time you teach
      the course.
         We have starred (?) the sections and exercises that are more suitable for graduate
      students than for undergraduates. A starred section is not necessarily more difﬁ-
      cult than an unstarred one, but it may require an understanding of more advanced
      mathematics. Likewise, starred exercises may require an advanced background or
      more than average creativity.

      To the student
      We hope that this textbook provides you with an enjoyable introduction to the
      ﬁeld of algorithms. We have attempted to make every algorithm accessible and
      interesting. To help you when you encounter unfamiliar or difﬁcult algorithms, we
      describe each one in a step-by-step manner. We also provide careful explanations
      of the mathematics needed to understand the analysis of the algorithms. If you
      already have some familiarity with a topic, you will ﬁnd the chapters organized so
      that you can skim introductory sections and proceed quickly to the more advanced
      material.
         This is a large book, and your class will probably cover only a portion of its
      material. We have tried, however, to make this a book that will be useful to you
      now as a course textbook and also later in your career as a mathematical desk
      reference or an engineering handbook.
