           35.4 Randomization and linear programming                                         1123




35.4 Randomization and linear programming

           In this section, we study two useful techniques for designing approximation algo-
           rithms: randomization and linear programming. We shall give a simple randomized
           algorithm for an optimization version of 3-CNF satisﬁability, and then we shall use
           linear programming to help design an approximation algorithm for a weighted ver-
           sion of the vertex-cover problem. This section only scratches the surface of these
           two powerful techniques. The chapter notes give references for further study of
           these areas.

           A randomized approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisﬁability
           Just as some randomized algorithms compute exact solutions, some randomized
           algorithms compute approximate solutions. We say that a randomized algorithm
           for a problem has an approximation ratio of .n/ if, for any input of size n, the
           expected cost C of the solution produced by the randomized algorithm is within a
           factor of .n/ of the cost C  of an optimal solution:
                          
                   C C
           max        ;       .n/ :                                               (35.13)
                  C C
           We call a randomized algorithm that achieves an approximation ratio of .n/ a
           randomized .n/-approximation algorithm. In other words, a randomized ap-
           proximation algorithm is like a deterministic approximation algorithm, except that
           the approximation ratio is for an expected cost.
              A particular instance of 3-CNF satisﬁability, as deﬁned in Section 34.4, may or
           may not be satisﬁable. In order to be satisﬁable, there must exist an assignment of
           the variables so that every clause evaluates to 1. If an instance is not satisﬁable, we
           may want to compute how “close” to satisﬁable it is, that is, we may wish to ﬁnd an
           assignment of the variables that satisﬁes as many clauses as possible. We call the
           resulting maximization problem MAX-3-CNF satisﬁability. The input to MAX-3-
           CNF satisﬁability is the same as for 3-CNF satisﬁability, and the goal is to return
           an assignment of the variables that maximizes the number of clauses evaluating
           to 1. We now show that randomly setting each variable to 1 with probability 1=2
           and to 0 with probability 1=2 yields a randomized 8=7-approximation algorithm.
           According to the deﬁnition of 3-CNF satisﬁability from Section 34.4, we require
           each clause to consist of exactly three distinct literals. We further assume that
           no clause contains both a variable and its negation. (Exercise 35.4-1 asks you to
           remove this last assumption.)
