894        Chapter 29 Linear Programming


             State for which values of r, s, and t you can assert that
           1. Both P and D have optimal solutions with ﬁnite objective values.
           2. P is feasible, but D is infeasible.
           3. D is feasible, but P is infeasible.
           4. Neither P nor D is feasible.



Problems

           29-1 Linear-inequality feasibility
           Given a set of m linear inequalities on n variables x1 ; x2 ; : : : ; xn , the linear-
           inequality feasibility problem asks whether there is a setting of the variables that
           simultaneously satisﬁes each of the inequalities.
           a. Show that if we have an algorithm for linear programming, we can use it to
              solve a linear-inequality feasibility problem. The number of variables and con-
              straints that you use in the linear-programming problem should be polynomial
              in n and m.

           b. Show that if we have an algorithm for the linear-inequality feasibility problem,
              we can use it to solve a linear-programming problem. The number of variables
              and linear inequalities that you use in the linear-inequality feasibility problem
              should be polynomial in n and m, the number of variables and constraints in
              the linear program.

           29-2 Complementary slackness
           Complementary slackness describes a relationship between the values of primal
           variables and dual constraints and between the values of dual variables and pri-
           mal constraints. Let xN be a feasible solution to the primal linear program given
           in (29.16)–(29.18), and let yN be a feasible solution to the dual linear program given
           in (29.83)–(29.85). Complementary slackness states that the following conditions
           are necessary and sufﬁcient for xN and yN to be optimal:
           X
           m
                  aij yNi D cj or xNj D 0 for j D 1; 2; : : : ; n
           i D1

           and
           Xn
                  aij xNj D bi or yNi D 0 for i D 1; 2; : : : ; m :
           j D1
