270   Chapter 11 Hash Tables


      no elements are stored outside the table, unlike in chaining. Thus, in open ad-
      dressing, the hash table can “ﬁll up” so that no further insertions can be made; one
      consequence is that the load factor ˛ can never exceed 1.
         Of course, we could store the linked lists for chaining inside the hash table, in
      the otherwise unused hash-table slots (see Exercise 11.2-4), but the advantage of
      open addressing is that it avoids pointers altogether. Instead of following pointers,
      we compute the sequence of slots to be examined. The extra memory freed by not
      storing pointers provides the hash table with a larger number of slots for the same
      amount of memory, potentially yielding fewer collisions and faster retrieval.
         To perform insertion using open addressing, we successively examine, or probe,
      the hash table until we ﬁnd an empty slot in which to put the key. Instead of being
      ﬁxed in the order 0; 1; : : : ; m  1 (which requires ‚.n/ search time), the sequence
      of positions probed depends upon the key being inserted. To determine which slots
      to probe, we extend the hash function to include the probe number (starting from 0)
      as a second input. Thus, the hash function becomes
      hWU      f0; 1; : : : ; m  1g ! f0; 1; : : : ; m  1g :
      With open addressing, we require that for every key k, the probe sequence
      hh.k; 0/; h.k; 1/; : : : ; h.k; m  1/i
      be a permutation of h0; 1; : : : ; m1i, so that every hash-table position is eventually
      considered as a slot for a new key as the table ﬁlls up. In the following pseudocode,
      we assume that the elements in the hash table T are keys with no satellite infor-
      mation; the key k is identical to the element containing key k. Each slot contains
      either a key or NIL (if the slot is empty). The H ASH -I NSERT procedure takes as
      input a hash table T and a key k. It either returns the slot number where it stores
      key k or ﬂags an error because the hash table is already full.

      H ASH -I NSERT .T; k/
      1 i D0
      2 repeat
      3        j D h.k; i/
      4        if T Œj  == NIL
      5              T Œj  D k
      6              return j
      7        else i D i C 1
      8 until i == m
      9 error “hash table overﬂow”

         The algorithm for searching for key k probes the same sequence of slots that the
      insertion algorithm examined when key k was inserted. Therefore, the search can
