1138       Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms


           each item. If we take a fraction xi of item i, where 0  xi  1, we contribute
           xi wi to the weight of the knapsack and receive value xi i . Our goal is to develop
           a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.
              In order to design a polynomial-time algorithm, we consider restricted instances
           of the 0-1 knapsack problem. Given an instance I of the knapsack problem, we
           form restricted instances Ij , for j D 1; 2; : : : ; n, by removing items 1; 2; : : : ; j  1
           and requiring the solution to include item j (all of item j in both the fractional
           and 0-1 knapsack problems). No items are removed in instance I1 . For instance Ij ,
           let Pj denote an optimal solution to the 0-1 problem and Qj denote an optimal
           solution to the fractional problem.
           a. Argue that an optimal solution to instance I of the 0-1 knapsack problem is one
              of fP1 ; P2 ; : : : ; Pn g.

           b. Prove that we can ﬁnd an optimal solution Qj to the fractional problem for in-
              stance Ij by including item j and then using the greedy algorithm in which
              at each step, we take as much as possible of the unchosen item in the set
              fj C 1; j C 2; : : : ; ng with maximum value per pound i =wi .

           c. Prove that we can always construct an optimal solution Qj to the fractional
              problem for instance Ij that includes at most one item fractionally. That is, for
              all items except possibly one, we either include all of the item or none of the
              item in the knapsack.

           d. Given an optimal solution Qj to the fractional problem for instance Ij , form
              solution Rj from Qj by deleting any fractional items from Qj . Let .S/ denote
              the total value of items taken in a solution S. Prove that .Rj /  .Qj /=2 
              .Pj /=2.

           e. Give a polynomial-time algorithm that returns a maximum-value solution from
              the set fR1 ; R2 ; : : : ; Rn g, and prove that your algorithm is a polynomial-time
              2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.


Chapter notes

           Although methods that do not necessarily compute exact solutions have been
           known for thousands of years (for example, methods to approximate the value
           of ), the notion of an approximation algorithm is much more recent. Hochbaum
           [172] credits Garey, Graham, and Ullman [128] and Johnson [190] with formal-
           izing the concept of a polynomial-time approximation algorithm. The ﬁrst such
           algorithm is often credited to Graham [149].
