1208        Appendix C   Counting and Probability


            Pr fX 0  kg  Pr fX  kg :
            (Hint: Show how to obtain the Bernoulli trials in A0 by an experiment involving
            the trials of A, and use the result of Exercise C.3-7.)



? C.5 The tails of the binomial distribution

            The probability of having at least, or at most, k successes in n Bernoulli trials,
            each with probability p of success, is often of more interest than the probability of
            having exactly k successes. In this section, we investigate the tails of the binomial
            distribution: the two regions of the distribution b.kI n; p/ that are far from the
            mean np. We shall prove several important bounds on (the sum of all terms in) a
            tail.
               We ﬁrst provide a bound on the right tail of the distribution b.kI n; p/. We can
            determine bounds on the left tail by inverting the roles of successes and failures.

            Theorem C.2
            Consider a sequence of n Bernoulli trials, where success occurs with probability p.
            Let X be the random variable denoting the total number of successes. Then for
            0  k  n, the probability of at least k successes is
                                X
                                n
            Pr fX  kg D               b.iI n; p/
                                i Dk
                                    !
                                  n k
                                     p :
                                  k


            Proof For S  f1; 2; : : : ; ng, we let AS denote the event that the ith trial is a
            success for every i 2 S. Clearly Pr fAS g D p k if jSj D k. We have
            Pr fX  kg D Pr fthere exists S  f1; 2; : : : ; ng W jSj D k and AS g
                                   [         
                       D Pr                AS
                                       Sf1;2;:::;ngWjSjDk
                                         X
                                                 Pr fAS g   (by inequality (C.19))
                                Sf1;2;:::;ngWjSjDk
                                    !
                                  n k
                           D          p :
                                  k
