35.2 The traveling-salesman problem                                             1115


ery vertex is visited exactly once, and in fact it is the cycle computed by A PPROX -
TSP-T OUR. Since H is obtained by deleting vertices from the full walk W , we
have
c.H /  c.W / :                                                               (35.7)
                                                                
Combining inequalities (35.6) and (35.7) gives c.H /  2c.H /, which completes
the proof.

   In spite of the nice approximation ratio provided by Theorem 35.2, A PPROX -
TSP-T OUR is usually not the best practical choice for this problem. There are other
approximation algorithms that typically perform much better in practice. (See the
references at the end of this chapter.)

35.2.2   The general traveling-salesman problem
If we drop the assumption that the cost function c satisﬁes the triangle inequality,
then we cannot ﬁnd good approximate tours in polynomial time unless P D NP.

Theorem 35.3
If P ¤ NP, then for any constant   1, there is no polynomial-time approximation
algorithm with approximation ratio  for the general traveling-salesman problem.

Proof The proof is by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that for some num-
ber   1, there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm A with approx-
imation ratio . Without loss of generality, we assume that  is an integer, by
rounding it up if necessary. We shall then show how to use A to solve instances
of the hamiltonian-cycle problem (deﬁned in Section 34.2) in polynomial time.
Since Theorem 34.13 tells us that the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete,
Theorem 34.4 implies that if we can solve it in polynomial time, then P D NP.
   Let G D .V; E/ be an instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem. We wish to
determine efﬁciently whether G contains a hamiltonian cycle by making use of
the hypothesized approximation algorithm A. We turn G into an instance of the
traveling-salesman problem as follows. Let G 0 D .V; E 0 / be the complete graph
on V ; that is,
E 0 D f.u; / W u;  2 V and u ¤ g :
Assign an integer cost to each edge in E 0 as follows:
          (
            1            if .u; / 2 E ;
c.u; / D
             jV j C 1 otherwise :
We can create representations of G 0 and c from a representation of G in time poly-
nomial in jV j and jEj.
