1006   Chapter 32 String Matching


       C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION .P /
        1 m D P:length
        2 let Œ1 : : m be a new array
        3 Œ1 D 0
        4 k D0
        5 for q D 2 to m
        6      while k > 0 and P Œk C 1 ¤ P Œq
        7            k D Œk
        8      if P Œk C 1 == P Œq
        9            k D kC1
       10      Œq D k
       11 return 

       These two procedures have much in common, because both match a string against
       the pattern P : KMP-M ATCHER matches the text T against P , and C OMPUTE -
       P REFIX -F UNCTION matches P against itself.
          We begin with an analysis of the running times of these procedures. Proving
       these procedures correct will be more complicated.

       Running-time analysis
       The running time of C OMPUTE -P REFIX -F UNCTION is ‚.m/, which we show by
       using the aggregate method of amortized analysis (see Section 17.1). The only
       tricky part is showing that the while loop of lines 6–7 executes O.m/ times alto-
       gether. We shall show that it makes at most m  1 iterations. We start by making
       some observations about k. First, line 4 starts k at 0, and the only way that k
       increases is by the increment operation in line 9, which executes at most once per
       iteration of the for loop of lines 5–10. Thus, the total increase in k is at most m  1.
       Second, since k < q upon entering the for loop and each iteration of the loop in-
       crements q, we always have k < q. Therefore, the assignments in lines 3 and 10
       ensure that Œq < q for all q D 1; 2; : : : ; m, which means that each iteration of
       the while loop decreases k. Third, k never becomes negative. Putting these facts
       together, we see that the total decrease in k from the while loop is bounded from
       above by the total increase in k over all iterations of the for loop, which is m  1.
       Thus, the while loop iterates at most m  1 times in all, and C OMPUTE -P REFIX -
       F UNCTION runs in time ‚.m/.
          Exercise 32.4-4 asks you to show, by a similar aggregate analysis, that the match-
       ing time of KMP-M ATCHER is ‚.n/.
          Compared with F INITE -AUTOMATON -M ATCHER, by using  rather than ı, we
       have reduced the time for preprocessing the pattern from O.m j†j/ to ‚.m/, while
       keeping the actual matching time bounded by ‚.n/.
