34.3 NP-completeness and reducibility                                                       1069


                                        yes, f .x/ 2 L2   yes, x 2 L1
  x                   f .x/
               F                   A2
                                        no, f .x/ 62 L2   no, x 62 L1
                              A1



Figure 34.5 The proof of Lemma 34.3. The algorithm F is a reduction algorithm that computes the
reduction function f from L1 to L2 in polynomial time, and A2 is a polynomial-time algorithm that
decides L2 . Algorithm A1 decides whether x 2 L1 by using F to transform any input x into f .x/
and then using A2 to decide whether f .x/ 2 L2 .


why the “less than or equal to” notation for reduction is mnemonic. We can now
deﬁne the set of NP-complete languages, which are the hardest problems in NP.
  A language L  f0; 1g is NP-complete if
1. L 2 NP, and
2. L0 P L for every L0 2 NP.
If a language L satisﬁes property 2, but not necessarily property 1, we say that L
is NP-hard. We also deﬁne NPC to be the class of NP-complete languages.
   As the following theorem shows, NP-completeness is at the crux of deciding
whether P is in fact equal to NP.

Theorem 34.4
If any NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable, then P D NP. Equiva-
lently, if any problem in NP is not polynomial-time solvable, then no NP-complete
problem is polynomial-time solvable.

Proof Suppose that L 2 P and also that L 2 NPC. For any L0 2 NP, we
have L0 P L by property 2 of the deﬁnition of NP-completeness. Thus, by
Lemma 34.3, we also have that L0 2 P, which proves the ﬁrst statement of the
theorem.
   To prove the second statement, note that it is the contrapositive of the ﬁrst state-
ment.

   It is for this reason that research into the P ¤ NP question centers around the
NP-complete problems. Most theoretical computer scientists believe that P ¤ NP,
which leads to the relationships among P, NP, and NPC shown in Figure 34.6.
But, for all we know, someone may yet come up with a polynomial-time algo-
rithm for an NP-complete problem, thus proving that P D NP. Nevertheless, since
no polynomial-time algorithm for any NP-complete problem has yet been discov-
