23   Minimum Spanning Trees




     Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several components elec-
     trically equivalent by wiring them together. To interconnect a set of n pins, we can
     use an arrangement of n  1 wires, each connecting two pins. Of all such arrange-
     ments, the one that uses the least amount of wire is usually the most desirable.
        We can model this wiring problem with a connected, undirected graph G D
     .V; E/, where V is the set of pins, E is the set of possible interconnections between
     pairs of pins, and for each edge .u; / 2 E, we have a weight w.u; / specifying
     the cost (amount of wire needed) to connect u and . We then wish to ﬁnd an
     acyclic subset T  E that connects all of the vertices and whose total weight
                X
     w.T / D          w.u; /
                .u;/2T

     is minimized. Since T is acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it must form a tree,
     which we call a spanning tree since it “spans” the graph G. We call the problem of
     determining the tree T the minimum-spanning-tree problem.1 Figure 23.1 shows
     an example of a connected graph and a minimum spanning tree.
        In this chapter, we shall examine two algorithms for solving the minimum-
     spanning-tree problem: Kruskal’s algorithm and Prim’s algorithm. We can easily
     make each of them run in time O.E lg V / using ordinary binary heaps. By using
     Fibonacci heaps, Prim’s algorithm runs in time O.E C V lg V /, which improves
     over the binary-heap implementation if jV j is much smaller than jEj.
        The two algorithms are greedy algorithms, as described in Chapter 16. Each
     step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible choices. The greedy
     strategy advocates making the choice that is the best at the moment. Such a strat-
     egy does not generally guarantee that it will always ﬁnd globally optimal solutions


     1 The phrase “minimum spanning tree” is a shortened form of the phrase “minimum-weight spanning

     tree.” We are not, for example, minimizing the number of edges in T , since all spanning trees have
     exactly jV j  1 edges by Theorem B.2.
