370        Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming


           15.1-2
           Show, by means of a counterexample, that the following “greedy” strategy does
           not always determine an optimal way to cut rods. Deﬁne the density of a rod of
           length i to be pi =i, that is, its value per inch. The greedy strategy for a rod of
           length n cuts off a ﬁrst piece of length i, where 1  i  n, having maximum
           density. It then continues by applying the greedy strategy to the remaining piece of
           length n  i.

           15.1-3
           Consider a modiﬁcation of the rod-cutting problem in which, in addition to a
           price pi for each rod, each cut incurs a ﬁxed cost of c. The revenue associated with
           a solution is now the sum of the prices of the pieces minus the costs of making the
           cuts. Give a dynamic-programming algorithm to solve this modiﬁed problem.

           15.1-4
           Modify M EMOIZED -C UT-ROD to return not only the value but the actual solution,
           too.

           15.1-5
           The Fibonacci numbers are deﬁned by recurrence (3.22). Give an O.n/-time
           dynamic-programming algorithm to compute the nth Fibonacci number. Draw the
           subproblem graph. How many vertices and edges are in the graph?



15.2 Matrix-chain multiplication

           Our next example of dynamic programming is an algorithm that solves the problem
           of matrix-chain multiplication. We are given a sequence (chain) hA1 ; A2 ; : : : ; An i
           of n matrices to be multiplied, and we wish to compute the product
           A1 A2    An :                                                                  (15.5)
           We can evaluate the expression (15.5) using the standard algorithm for multiply-
           ing pairs of matrices as a subroutine once we have parenthesized it to resolve all
           ambiguities in how the matrices are multiplied together. Matrix multiplication is
           associative, and so all parenthesizations yield the same product. A product of ma-
           trices is fully parenthesized if it is either a single matrix or the product of two fully
           parenthesized matrix products, surrounded by parentheses. For example, if the
           chain of matrices is hA1 ; A2 ; A3 ; A4 i, then we can fully parenthesize the product
           A1 A2 A3 A4 in ﬁve distinct ways:
