1072     Chapter 34 NP-Completeness


  x1 1     1                                          x1
  x2 1     1
                        1                             x2
                        0
           1
                        0            1
                                     1         1
           1            1            1
  x3 0     1                                          x3
           1

                     (a)                                                         (b)


         Figure 34.8 Two instances of the circuit-satisﬁability problem. (a) The assignment hx1 D 1;
         x2 D 1; x3 D 0i to the inputs of this circuit causes the output of the circuit to be 1. The circuit
         is therefore satisﬁable. (b) No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause the output of the
         circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore unsatisﬁable.

            A truth assignment for a boolean combinational circuit is a set of boolean input
         values. We say that a one-output boolean combinational circuit is satisﬁable if it
         has a satisfying assignment: a truth assignment that causes the output of the circuit
         to be 1. For example, the circuit in Figure 34.8(a) has the satisfying assignment
         hx1 D 1; x2 D 1; x3 D 0i, and so it is satisﬁable. As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to
         show, no assignment of values to x1 , x2 , and x3 causes the circuit in Figure 34.8(b)
         to produce a 1 output; it always produces 0, and so it is unsatisﬁable.
            The circuit-satisﬁability problem is, “Given a boolean combinational circuit
         composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisﬁable?” In order to pose this
         question formally, however, we must agree on a standard encoding for circuits.
         The size of a boolean combinational circuit is the number of boolean combina-
         tional elements plus the number of wires in the circuit. We could devise a graphlike
         encoding that maps any given circuit C into a binary string hC i whose length is
         polynomial in the size of the circuit itself. As a formal language, we can therefore
         deﬁne
         CIRCUIT-SAT D fhC i W C is a satisﬁable boolean combinational circuitg :
            The circuit-satisﬁability problem arises in the area of computer-aided hardware
         optimization. If a subcircuit always produces 0, that subcircuit is unnecessary;
         the designer can replace it by a simpler subcircuit that omits all logic gates and
         provides the constant 0 value as its output. You can see why we would like to have
         a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
            Given a circuit C , we might attempt to determine whether it is satisﬁable by
         simply checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately, if the circuit
         has k inputs, then we would have to check up to 2k possible assignments. When
