84   Chapter 4 Divide-and-Conquer


     where the last step holds as long as c  1.
        Mathematical induction now requires us to show that our solution holds for the
     boundary conditions. Typically, we do so by showing that the boundary condi-
     tions are suitable as base cases for the inductive proof. For the recurrence (4.19),
     we must show that we can choose the constant c large enough so that the bound
     T .n/  cn lg n works for the boundary conditions as well. This requirement
     can sometimes lead to problems. Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that
     T .1/ D 1 is the sole boundary condition of the recurrence. Then for n D 1, the
     bound T .n/  cn lg n yields T .1/  c1 lg 1 D 0, which is at odds with T .1/ D 1.
     Consequently, the base case of our inductive proof fails to hold.
        We can overcome this obstacle in proving an inductive hypothesis for a spe-
     ciﬁc boundary condition with only a little more effort. In the recurrence (4.19),
     for example, we take advantage of asymptotic notation requiring us only to prove
     T .n/  cn lg n for n  n0 , where n0 is a constant that we get to choose. We
     keep the troublesome boundary condition T .1/ D 1, but remove it from consid-
     eration in the inductive proof. We do so by ﬁrst observing that for n > 3, the
     recurrence does not depend directly on T .1/. Thus, we can replace T .1/ by T .2/
     and T .3/ as the base cases in the inductive proof, letting n0 D 2. Note that we
     make a distinction between the base case of the recurrence (n D 1) and the base
     cases of the inductive proof (n D 2 and n D 3). With T .1/ D 1, we derive from
     the recurrence that T .2/ D 4 and T .3/ D 5. Now we can complete the inductive
     proof that T .n/  cn lg n for some constant c  1 by choosing c large enough
     so that T .2/  c2 lg 2 and T .3/  c3 lg 3. As it turns out, any choice of c  2
     sufﬁces for the base cases of n D 2 and n D 3 to hold. For most of the recurrences
     we shall examine, it is straightforward to extend boundary conditions to make the
     inductive assumption work for small n, and we shall not always explicitly work out
     the details.

     Making a good guess
     Unfortunately, there is no general way to guess the correct solutions to recurrences.
     Guessing a solution takes experience and, occasionally, creativity. Fortunately,
     though, you can use some heuristics to help you become a good guesser. You
     can also use recursion trees, which we shall see in Section 4.4, to generate good
     guesses.
       If a recurrence is similar to one you have seen before, then guessing a similar
     solution is reasonable. As an example, consider the recurrence
     T .n/ D 2T .bn=2c C 17/ C n ;
     which looks difﬁcult because of the added “17” in the argument to T on the right-
     hand side. Intuitively, however, this additional term cannot substantially affect the
