           34.3 NP-completeness and reducibility                                         1067




34.3 NP-completeness and reducibility

           Perhaps the most compelling reason why theoretical computer scientists believe
           that P ¤ NP comes from the existence of the class of “NP-complete” problems.
           This class has the intriguing property that if any NP-complete problem can be
           solved in polynomial time, then every problem in NP has a polynomial-time solu-
           tion, that is, P D NP. Despite years of study, though, no polynomial-time algorithm
           has ever been discovered for any NP-complete problem.
              The language HAM-CYCLE is one NP-complete problem. If we could decide
           HAM-CYCLE in polynomial time, then we could solve every problem in NP in
           polynomial time. In fact, if NP  P should turn out to be nonempty, we could say
           with certainty that HAM-CYCLE 2 NP  P.
              The NP-complete languages are, in a sense, the “hardest” languages in NP. In
           this section, we shall show how to compare the relative “hardness” of languages
           using a precise notion called “polynomial-time reducibility.” Then we formally
           deﬁne the NP-complete languages, and we ﬁnish by sketching a proof that one
           such language, called CIRCUIT-SAT, is NP-complete. In Sections 34.4 and 34.5,
           we shall use the notion of reducibility to show that many other problems are NP-
           complete.

           Reducibility
           Intuitively, a problem Q can be reduced to another problem Q0 if any instance of Q
           can be “easily rephrased” as an instance of Q0 , the solution to which provides a
           solution to the instance of Q. For example, the problem of solving linear equations
           in an indeterminate x reduces to the problem of solving quadratic equations. Given
           an instance ax C b D 0, we transform it to 0x 2 C ax C b D 0, whose solution
           provides a solution to ax C b D 0. Thus, if a problem Q reduces to another
           problem Q0 , then Q is, in a sense, “no harder to solve” than Q0 .
              Returning to our formal-language framework for decision problems, we say that
           a language L1 is polynomial-time reducible to a language L2 , written L1 P L2 ,
           if there exists a polynomial-time computable function f W f0; 1g ! f0; 1g such
           that for all x 2 f0; 1g ,
           x 2 L1 if and only if f .x/ 2 L2 :                                          (34.1)
           We call the function f the reduction function, and a polynomial-time algorithm F
           that computes f is a reduction algorithm.
              Figure 34.4 illustrates the idea of a polynomial-time reduction from a lan-
           guage L1 to another language L2 . Each language is a subset of f0; 1g . The
           reduction function f provides a polynomial-time mapping such that if x 2 L1 ,
