           34.2 Polynomial-time veriﬁcation                                               1061


           34.1-5
           Show that if an algorithm makes at most a constant number of calls to polynomial-
           time subroutines and performs an additional amount of work that also takes polyno-
           mial time, then it runs in polynomial time. Also show that a polynomial number of
           calls to polynomial-time subroutines may result in an exponential-time algorithm.

           34.1-6
           Show that the class P, viewed as a set of languages, is closed under union, inter-
           section, concatenation, complement, and Kleene star. That is, if L1 ; L2 2 P, then
           L1 [ L2 2 P, L1 \ L2 2 P, L1 L2 2 P, L1 2 P, and L1 2 P.



34.2 Polynomial-time veriﬁcation

           We now look at algorithms that verify membership in languages. For example,
           suppose that for a given instance hG; u; ; ki of the decision problem PATH, we
           are also given a path p from u to . We can easily check whether p is a path in G
           and whether the length of p is at most k, and if so, we can view p as a “certiﬁcate”
           that the instance indeed belongs to PATH. For the decision problem PATH, this
           certiﬁcate doesn’t seem to buy us much. After all, PATH belongs to P—in fact,
           we can solve PATH in linear time—and so verifying membership from a given
           certiﬁcate takes as long as solving the problem from scratch. We shall now examine
           a problem for which we know of no polynomial-time decision algorithm and yet,
           given a certiﬁcate, veriﬁcation is easy.

           Hamiltonian cycles
           The problem of ﬁnding a hamiltonian cycle in an undirected graph has been stud-
           ied for over a hundred years. Formally, a hamiltonian cycle of an undirected graph
           G D .V; E/ is a simple cycle that contains each vertex in V . A graph that con-
           tains a hamiltonian cycle is said to be hamiltonian; otherwise, it is nonhamilto-
           nian. The name honors W. R. Hamilton, who described a mathematical game on
           the dodecahedron (Figure 34.2(a)) in which one player sticks ﬁve pins in any ﬁve
           consecutive vertices and the other player must complete the path to form a cycle
