22.2 Breadth-ﬁrst search                                                                599


Lemma 22.3
Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graph G D .V; E/, the queue Q
contains the vertices h1 ; 2 ; : : : ; r i, where 1 is the head of Q and r is the tail.
Then, r :d  1 :d C 1 and i :d  i C1 :d for i D 1; 2; : : : ; r  1.

Proof The proof is by induction on the number of queue operations. Initially,
when the queue contains only s, the lemma certainly holds.
   For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after both dequeuing
and enqueuing a vertex. If the head 1 of the queue is dequeued, 2 becomes the
new head. (If the queue becomes empty, then the lemma holds vacuously.) By the
inductive hypothesis, 1 :d  2 :d. But then we have r :d  1 :d C 1  2 :d C 1,
and the remaining inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma follows with 2 as
the head.
   In order to understand what happens upon enqueuing a vertex, we need to ex-
amine the code more closely. When we enqueue a vertex  in line 17 of BFS, it
becomes rC1 . At that time, we have already removed vertex u, whose adjacency
list is currently being scanned, from the queue Q, and by the inductive hypothesis,
the new head 1 has 1 :d  u:d. Thus, rC1 :d D :d D u:d C1  1 :d C1. From
the inductive hypothesis, we also have r :d  u:d C 1, and so r :d  u:d C 1 D
:d D rC1 :d, and the remaining inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma
follows when  is enqueued.

  The following corollary shows that the d values at the time that vertices are
enqueued are monotonically increasing over time.

Corollary 22.4
Suppose that vertices i and j are enqueued during the execution of BFS, and
that i is enqueued before j . Then i :d  j :d at the time that j is enqueued.

Proof Immediate from Lemma 22.3 and the property that each vertex receives a
ﬁnite d value at most once during the course of BFS.

   We can now prove that breadth-ﬁrst search correctly ﬁnds shortest-path dis-
tances.

Theorem 22.5 (Correctness of breadth-ﬁrst search)
Let G D .V; E/ be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is run
on G from a given source vertex s 2 V . Then, during its execution, BFS discovers
every vertex  2 V that is reachable from the source s, and upon termination,
:d D ı.s; / for all  2 V . Moreover, for any vertex  ¤ s that is reachable
