622   Chapter 22 Elementary Graph Algorithms




                                 2
               1                                                                 6
                                                     4
                                 3

                                                                     5




      Figure 22.10 The articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components of a connected, undi-
      rected graph for use in Problem 22-2. The articulation points are the heavily shaded vertices, the
      bridges are the heavily shaded edges, and the biconnected components are the edges in the shaded
      regions, with a bcc numbering shown.


      these deﬁnitions. We can determine articulation points, bridges, and biconnected
      components using depth-ﬁrst search. Let G D .V; E / be a depth-ﬁrst tree of G.
      a. Prove that the root of G is an articulation point of G if and only if it has at
         least two children in G .

      b. Let  be a nonroot vertex of G . Prove that  is an articulation point of G if and
         only if  has a child s such that there is no back edge from s or any descendant
         of s to a proper ancestor of .

      c. Let
                          (
                              :d ;
          :low D min
                              w:d W .u; w/ is a back edge for some descendant u of  :

          Show how to compute :low for all vertices  2 V in O.E/ time.

      d. Show how to compute all articulation points in O.E/ time.

      e. Prove that an edge of G is a bridge if and only if it does not lie on any simple
         cycle of G.

      f. Show how to compute all the bridges of G in O.E/ time.

      g. Prove that the biconnected components of G partition the nonbridge edges of G.

      h. Give an O.E/-time algorithm to label each edge e of G with a positive in-
         teger e:bcc such that e:bcc D e 0 :bcc if and only if e and e 0 are in the same
         biconnected component.
