24.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties                                                      675


                                      x

                                              z
 s                                                        v
                      u
                                          y



Figure 24.9 Showing that a simple path in G from source s to vertex  is unique. If there are two
paths p1 (s ; u ; x ! ´ ; ) and p2 (s ; u ; y ! ´ ; ), where x ¤ y, then ´:  D x
and ´:  D y, a contradiction.


But
X
k                 X
                  k
       i :d D           i 1 :d ;
i D1              i D1

since each vertex in the cycle c appears exactly once in each summation. This
equality implies
       X
       k
0>            w.i 1 ; i / :
       i D1

Thus, the sum of weights around the cycle c is negative, which provides the desired
contradiction.
   We have now proven that G is a directed, acyclic graph. To show that it forms
a rooted tree with root s, it sufﬁces (see Exercise B.5-2) to prove that for each
vertex  2 V , there is a unique simple path from s to  in G .
   We ﬁrst must show that a path from s exists for each vertex in V . The ver-
tices in V are those with non-NIL  values, plus s. The idea here is to prove by
induction that a path exists from s to all vertices in V . We leave the details as
Exercise 24.5-6.
   To complete the proof of the lemma, we must now show that for any vertex
 2 V , the graph G contains at most one simple path from s to . Suppose other-
wise. That is, suppose that, as Figure 24.9 illustrates, G contains two simple paths
from s to some vertex : p1 , which we decompose into s ; u ; x ! ´ ; ,
and p2 , which we decompose into s ; u ; y ! ´ ; , where x ¤ y (though u
could be s and ´ could be ). But then, ´: D x and ´: D y, which implies
the contradiction that x D y. We conclude that G contains a unique simple path
from s to , and thus G forms a rooted tree with root s.

   We can now show that if, after we have performed a sequence of relaxation steps,
all vertices have been assigned their true shortest-path weights, then the predeces-
sor subgraph G is a shortest-paths tree.
