Introduction

               This part will start you thinking about designing and analyzing algorithms. It is
               intended to be a gentle introduction to how we specify algorithms, some of the
               design strategies we will use throughout this book, and many of the fundamental
               ideas used in algorithm analysis. Later parts of this book will build upon this base.
                  Chapter 1 provides an overview of algorithms and their place in modern com-
               puting systems. This chapter deﬁnes what an algorithm is and lists some examples.
               It also makes a case that we should consider algorithms as a technology, along-
               side technologies such as fast hardware, graphical user interfaces, object-oriented
               systems, and networks.
                  In Chapter 2, we see our ﬁrst algorithms, which solve the problem of sorting
               a sequence of n numbers. They are written in a pseudocode which, although not
               directly translatable to any conventional programming language, conveys the struc-
               ture of the algorithm clearly enough that you should be able to implement it in the
               language of your choice. The sorting algorithms we examine are insertion sort,
               which uses an incremental approach, and merge sort, which uses a recursive tech-
               nique known as “divide-and-conquer.” Although the time each requires increases
               with the value of n, the rate of increase differs between the two algorithms. We
               determine these running times in Chapter 2, and we develop a useful notation to
               express them.
                  Chapter 3 precisely deﬁnes this notation, which we call asymptotic notation. It
               starts by deﬁning several asymptotic notations, which we use for bounding algo-
               rithm running times from above and/or below. The rest of Chapter 3 is primarily
               a presentation of mathematical notation, more to ensure that your use of notation
               matches that in this book than to teach you new mathematical concepts.
