214        Chapter 9 Medians and Order Statistics




9.1   Minimum and maximum

           How many comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum of a set of n
           elements? We can easily obtain an upper bound of n  1 comparisons: examine
           each element of the set in turn and keep track of the smallest element seen so
           far. In the following procedure, we assume that the set resides in array A, where
           A:length D n.

           M INIMUM .A/
           1 min D AŒ1
           2 for i D 2 to A:length
           3      if min > AŒi
           4           min D AŒi
           5 return min

           We can, of course, ﬁnd the maximum with n  1 comparisons as well.
              Is this the best we can do? Yes, since we can obtain a lower bound of n  1
           comparisons for the problem of determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm
           that determines the minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each compar-
           ison is a match in the tournament in which the smaller of the two elements wins.
           Observing that every element except the winner must lose at least one match, we
           conclude that n  1 comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum. Hence,
           the algorithm M INIMUM is optimal with respect to the number of comparisons
           performed.

           Simultaneous minimum and maximum
           In some applications, we must ﬁnd both the minimum and the maximum of a set
           of n elements. For example, a graphics program may need to scale a set of .x; y/
           data to ﬁt onto a rectangular display screen or other graphical output device. To
           do so, the program must ﬁrst determine the minimum and maximum value of each
           coordinate.
              At this point, it should be obvious how to determine both the minimum and the
           maximum of n elements using ‚.n/ comparisons, which is asymptotically optimal:
           simply ﬁnd the minimum and maximum independently, using n  1 comparisons
           for each, for a total of 2n  2 comparisons.
              In fact, we can ﬁnd both the minimum and the maximum using at most 3 bn=2c
           comparisons. We do so by maintaining both the minimum and maximum elements
           seen thus far. Rather than processing each element of the input by comparing it
           against the current minimum and maximum, at a cost of 2 comparisons per element,
