846   Chapter 29 Linear Programming


      are linear inequalities. We use the general term linear constraints to denote either
      linear equalities or linear inequalities. In linear programming, we do not allow
      strict inequalities. Formally, a linear-programming problem is the problem of
      either minimizing or maximizing a linear function subject to a ﬁnite set of linear
      constraints. If we are to minimize, then we call the linear program a minimization
      linear program, and if we are to maximize, then we call the linear program a
      maximization linear program.
         The remainder of this chapter covers how to formulate and solve linear pro-
      grams. Although several polynomial-time algorithms for linear programming have
      been developed, we will not study them in this chapter. Instead, we shall study the
      simplex algorithm, which is the oldest linear-programming algorithm. The simplex
      algorithm does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, but it is fairly efﬁcient
      and widely used in practice.

      An overview of linear programming
      In order to describe properties of and algorithms for linear programs, we ﬁnd it
      convenient to express them in canonical forms. We shall use two forms, standard
      and slack, in this chapter. We will deﬁne them precisely in Section 29.1. Infor-
      mally, a linear program in standard form is the maximization of a linear function
      subject to linear inequalities, whereas a linear program in slack form is the max-
      imization of a linear function subject to linear equalities. We shall typically use
      standard form for expressing linear programs, but we ﬁnd it more convenient to
      use slack form when we describe the details of the simplex algorithm. For now, we
      restrict our attention to maximizing a linear function on n variables subject to a set
      of m linear inequalities.
         Let us ﬁrst consider the following linear program with two variables:
      maximize      x1 C       x2                                                   (29.11)
      subject to
                   4x1  x2             8                                          (29.12)
                   2x1 C x2            10                                          (29.13)
                   5x1  2x2           2                                          (29.14)
                      x1 ; x2           0 :                                        (29.15)
      We call any setting of the variables x1 and x2 that satisﬁes all the constraints
      (29.12)–(29.15) a feasible solution to the linear program. If we graph the con-
      straints in the .x1 ; x2 /-Cartesian coordinate system, as in Figure 29.2(a), we see
