1176   Appendix B    Sets, Etc.


       Vn D V , and jEn j D jVn j D jV j. Since Gn is a subgraph of G, we have En  E,
       and hence jEj  jV j, which contradicts the assumption that jEj D jV j  1. Thus,
       G is acyclic.
          (5) ) (6): Suppose that G is acyclic and that jEj D jV j  1. Let k be the
       number of connected components of G. Each connected component is a free tree
       by deﬁnition, and since (1) implies (5), the sum of all edges in all connected com-
       ponents of G is jV j  k. Consequently, we must have k D 1, and G is in fact a
       tree. Since (1) implies (2), any two vertices in G are connected by a unique simple
       path. Thus, adding any edge to G creates a cycle.
          (6) ) (1): Suppose that G is acyclic but that adding any edge to E creates a
       cycle. We must show that G is connected. Let u and  be arbitrary vertices in G.
       If u and  are not already adjacent, adding the edge .u; / creates a cycle in which
       all edges but .u; / belong to G. Thus, the cycle minus edge .u; / must contain a
       path from u to , and since u and  were chosen arbitrarily, G is connected.


       B.5.2 Rooted and ordered trees
       A rooted tree is a free tree in which one of the vertices is distinguished from the
       others. We call the distinguished vertex the root of the tree. We often refer to a
       vertex of a rooted tree as a node5 of the tree. Figure B.6(a) shows a rooted tree on
       a set of 12 nodes with root 7.
          Consider a node x in a rooted tree T with root r. We call any node y on the
       unique simple path from r to x an ancestor of x. If y is an ancestor of x, then x is
       a descendant of y. (Every node is both an ancestor and a descendant of itself.) If y
       is an ancestor of x and x ¤ y, then y is a proper ancestor of x and x is a proper
       descendant of y. The subtree rooted at x is the tree induced by descendants of x,
       rooted at x. For example, the subtree rooted at node 8 in Figure B.6(a) contains
       nodes 8, 6, 5, and 9.
          If the last edge on the simple path from the root r of a tree T to a node x is .y; x/,
       then y is the parent of x, and x is a child of y. The root is the only node in T with
       no parent. If two nodes have the same parent, they are siblings. A node with no
       children is a leaf or external node. A nonleaf node is an internal node.


       5 The term “node” is often used in the graph theory literature as a synonym for “vertex.” We reserve

       the term “node” to mean a vertex of a rooted tree.
