Preface                                                                           xix


Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, and the Columbia University De-
partment of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research. We thank our re-
spective universities and colleagues for providing such supportive and stimulating
environments.
   Julie Sussman, P.P.A., once again bailed us out as the technical copyeditor. Time
and again, we were amazed at the errors that eluded us, but that Julie caught. She
also helped us improve our presentation in several places. If there is a Hall of Fame
for technical copyeditors, Julie is a sure-ﬁre, ﬁrst-ballot inductee. She is nothing
short of phenomenal. Thank you, thank you, thank you, Julie! Priya Natarajan also
found some errors that we were able to correct before this book went to press. Any
errors that remain (and undoubtedly, some do) are the responsibility of the authors
(and probably were inserted after Julie read the material).
   The treatment for van Emde Boas trees derives from Erik Demaine’s notes,
which were in turn inﬂuenced by Michael Bender. We also incorporated ideas
from Javed Aslam, Bradley Kuszmaul, and Hui Zha into this edition.
   The chapter on multithreading was based on notes originally written jointly with
Harald Prokop. The material was inﬂuenced by several others working on the Cilk
project at MIT, including Bradley Kuszmaul and Matteo Frigo. The design of the
multithreaded pseudocode took its inspiration from the MIT Cilk extensions to C
and by Cilk Arts’s Cilk++ extensions to C++.
   We also thank the many readers of the ﬁrst and second editions who reported
errors or submitted suggestions for how to improve this book. We corrected all the
bona ﬁde errors that were reported, and we incorporated as many suggestions as
we could. We rejoice that the number of such contributors has grown so great that
we must regret that it has become impractical to list them all.
   Finally, we thank our wives—Nicole Cormen, Wendy Leiserson, Gail Rivest,
and Rebecca Ivry—and our children—Ricky, Will, Debby, and Katie Leiserson;
Alex and Christopher Rivest; and Molly, Noah, and Benjamin Stein—for their love
and support while we prepared this book. The patience and encouragement of our
families made this project possible. We affectionately dedicate this book to them.

T HOMAS H. C ORMEN                                        Lebanon, New Hampshire
C HARLES E. L EISERSON                                   Cambridge, Massachusetts
RONALD L. R IVEST                                        Cambridge, Massachusetts
C LIFFORD S TEIN                                               New York, New York

February 2009
