26   Maximum Flow




     Just as we can model a road map as a directed graph in order to ﬁnd the shortest
     path from one point to another, we can also interpret a directed graph as a “ﬂow
     network” and use it to answer questions about material ﬂows. Imagine a mate-
     rial coursing through a system from a source, where the material is produced, to
     a sink, where it is consumed. The source produces the material at some steady
     rate, and the sink consumes the material at the same rate. The “ﬂow” of the mate-
     rial at any point in the system is intuitively the rate at which the material moves.
     Flow networks can model many problems, including liquids ﬂowing through pipes,
     parts through assembly lines, current through electrical networks, and information
     through communication networks.
        We can think of each directed edge in a ﬂow network as a conduit for the mate-
     rial. Each conduit has a stated capacity, given as a maximum rate at which the ma-
     terial can ﬂow through the conduit, such as 200 gallons of liquid per hour through
     a pipe or 20 amperes of electrical current through a wire. Vertices are conduit
     junctions, and other than the source and sink, material ﬂows through the vertices
     without collecting in them. In other words, the rate at which material enters a ver-
     tex must equal the rate at which it leaves the vertex. We call this property “ﬂow
     conservation,” and it is equivalent to Kirchhoff’s current law when the material is
     electrical current.
        In the maximum-ﬂow problem, we wish to compute the greatest rate at which
     we can ship material from the source to the sink without violating any capacity
     constraints. It is one of the simplest problems concerning ﬂow networks and, as
     we shall see in this chapter, this problem can be solved by efﬁcient algorithms.
     Moreover, we can adapt the basic techniques used in maximum-ﬂow algorithms to
     solve other network-ﬂow problems.
        This chapter presents two general methods for solving the maximum-ﬂow prob-
     lem. Section 26.1 formalizes the notions of ﬂow networks and ﬂows, formally
     deﬁning the maximum-ﬂow problem. Section 26.2 describes the classical method
     of Ford and Fulkerson for ﬁnding maximum ﬂows. An application of this method,
