1196         Appendix C   Counting and Probability


             have picked one curtain but before the curtain is lifted, the emcee lifts one of the
             other curtains, knowing that it will reveal an empty stage, and asks if you would
             like to switch from your current selection to the remaining curtain. How would
             your chances change if you switch? (This question is the celebrated Monty Hall
             problem, named after a game-show host who often presented contestants with just
             this dilemma.)

             C.2-10 ?
             A prison warden has randomly picked one prisoner among three to go free. The
             other two will be executed. The guard knows which one will go free but is forbid-
             den to give any prisoner information regarding his status. Let us call the prisoners
             X , Y , and Z. Prisoner X asks the guard privately which of Y or Z will be exe-
             cuted, arguing that since he already knows that at least one of them must die, the
             guard won’t be revealing any information about his own status. The guard tells X
             that Y is to be executed. Prisoner X feels happier now, since he ﬁgures that either
             he or prisoner Z will go free, which means that his probability of going free is
             now 1=2. Is he right, or are his chances still 1=3? Explain.



C.3    Discrete random variables

             A (discrete) random variable X is a function from a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite
             sample space S to the real numbers. It associates a real number with each possible
             outcome of an experiment, which allows us to work with the probability distribu-
             tion induced on the resulting set of numbers. Random variables can also be deﬁned
             for uncountably inﬁnite sample spaces, but they raise technical issues that are un-
             necessary to address for our purposes. Henceforth, we shall assume that random
             variables are discrete.
                For a random variable X and a real number x, we deﬁne the event X D x to be
             fs 2 S W X.s/ D xg; thus,
                              X
             Pr fX D xg D         Pr fsg :
                           s2SWX.s/Dx

             The function
             f .x/ D Pr fX D xg

                                           P of the random variable X . From the probability
             is the probability density function
             axioms, Pr fX D xg  0 and x Pr fX D xg D 1.
                As an example, consider the experiment of rolling a pair of ordinary, 6-sided
             dice. There are 36 possible elementary events in the sample space. We assume
