188   Chapter 7 Quicksort


      7-4 Stack depth for quicksort
      The Q UICKSORT algorithm of Section 7.1 contains two recursive calls to itself.
      After Q UICKSORT calls PARTITION, it recursively sorts the left subarray and then
      it recursively sorts the right subarray. The second recursive call in Q UICKSORT
      is not really necessary; we can avoid it by using an iterative control structure.
      This technique, called tail recursion, is provided automatically by good compilers.
      Consider the following version of quicksort, which simulates tail recursion:

      TAIL -R ECURSIVE -Q UICKSORT .A; p; r/
      1 while p < r
      2       // Partition and sort left subarray.
      3       q D PARTITION .A; p; r/
      4       TAIL -R ECURSIVE -Q UICKSORT .A; p; q  1/
      5       p D qC1

      a. Argue that TAIL -R ECURSIVE -Q UICKSORT .A; 1; A:length/ correctly sorts the
         array A.

      Compilers usually execute recursive procedures by using a stack that contains per-
      tinent information, including the parameter values, for each recursive call. The
      information for the most recent call is at the top of the stack, and the information
      for the initial call is at the bottom. Upon calling a procedure, its information is
      pushed onto the stack; when it terminates, its information is popped. Since we
      assume that array parameters are represented by pointers, the information for each
      procedure call on the stack requires O.1/ stack space. The stack depth is the max-
      imum amount of stack space used at any time during a computation.

      b. Describe a scenario in which TAIL -R ECURSIVE -Q UICKSORT’s stack depth is
         ‚.n/ on an n-element input array.

      c. Modify the code for TAIL -R ECURSIVE -Q UICKSORT so that the worst-case
         stack depth is ‚.lg n/. Maintain the O.n lg n/ expected running time of the
         algorithm.

      7-5 Median-of-3 partition
      One way to improve the R ANDOMIZED -Q UICKSORT procedure is to partition
      around a pivot that is chosen more carefully than by picking a random element
      from the subarray. One common approach is the median-of-3 method: choose
      the pivot as the median (middle element) of a set of 3 elements randomly selected
      from the subarray. (See Exercise 7.4-6.) For this problem, let us assume that the
      elements in the input array AŒ1 : : n are distinct and that n  3. We denote the
