           22.5 Strongly connected components                                            615


            m             n             o               p


                   q             r              s


            t             u             v               w


                   x             y              z



           Figure 22.8 A dag for topological sorting.


           22.4-3
           Give an algorithm that determines whether or not a given undirected graph G D
           .V; E/ contains a cycle. Your algorithm should run in O.V / time, independent
           of jEj.

           22.4-4
           Prove or disprove: If a directed graph G contains cycles, then T OPOLOGICAL -
           S ORT.G/ produces a vertex ordering that minimizes the number of “bad” edges
           that are inconsistent with the ordering produced.

           22.4-5
           Another way to perform topological sorting on a directed acyclic graph G D
           .V; E/ is to repeatedly ﬁnd a vertex of in-degree 0, output it, and remove it and
           all of its outgoing edges from the graph. Explain how to implement this idea so
           that it runs in time O.V C E/. What happens to this algorithm if G has cycles?



22.5 Strongly connected components

           We now consider a classic application of depth-ﬁrst search: decomposing a di-
           rected graph into its strongly connected components. This section shows how to do
           so using two depth-ﬁrst searches. Many algorithms that work with directed graphs
           begin with such a decomposition. After decomposing the graph into strongly con-
           nected components, such algorithms run separately on each one and then combine
           the solutions according to the structure of connections among components.
              Recall from Appendix B that a strongly connected component of a directed
           graph G D .V; E/ is a maximal set of vertices C  V such that for every pair
           of vertices u and  in C , we have both u ;  and  ; u; that is, vertices u and 
           are reachable from each other. Figure 22.9 shows an example.
