760        Chapter 26 Maximum Flow


           queue is empty, the algorithm terminates. Show how to implement this algorithm
           to compute a maximum ﬂow in O.V 3 / time.

           26.5-3
           Show that the generic algorithm still works if R ELABEL updates u:h by sim-
           ply computing u:h D u:h C 1. How would this change affect the analysis of
           R ELABEL -T O -F RONT?

           26.5-4 ?
           Show that if we always discharge a highest overﬂowing vertex, we can make the
           push-relabel method run in O.V 3 / time.

           26.5-5
           Suppose that at some point in the execution of a push-relabel algorithm, there exists
           an integer 0 < k  jV j  1 for which no vertex has :h D k. Show that all
           vertices with :h > k are on the source side of a minimum cut. If such a k exists,
           the gap heuristic updates every vertex  2 V  fsg for which :h > k, to set
           :h D max.:h; jV j C 1/. Show that the resulting attribute h is a height function.
           (The gap heuristic is crucial in making implementations of the push-relabel method
           perform well in practice.)



Problems

           26-1 Escape problem
           An n n grid is an undirected graph consisting of n rows and n columns of vertices,
           as shown in Figure 26.11. We denote the vertex in the ith row and the j th column
           by .i; j /. All vertices in a grid have exactly four neighbors, except for the boundary
           vertices, which are the points .i; j / for which i D 1, i D n, j D 1, or j D n.
              Given m  n2 starting points .x1 ; y1 /; .x2 ; y2 /; : : : ; .xm ; ym / in the grid, the
           escape problem is to determine whether or not there are m vertex-disjoint paths
           from the starting points to any m different points on the boundary. For example,
           the grid in Figure 26.11(a) has an escape, but the grid in Figure 26.11(b) does not.

           a. Consider a ﬂow network in which vertices, as well as edges, have capacities.
              That is, the total positive ﬂow entering any given vertex is subject to a capacity
              constraint. Show that determining the maximum ﬂow in a network with edge
              and vertex capacities can be reduced to an ordinary maximum-ﬂow problem on
              a ﬂow network of comparable size.
