           Notes for Chapter 14                                                               355


           b. Design a data structure that efﬁciently supports the operations I NTERVAL -
              I NSERT, I NTERVAL -D ELETE, and F IND -POM, which returns a point of max-
              imum overlap. (Hint: Keep a red-black tree of all the endpoints. Associate
              a value of C1 with each left endpoint, and associate a value of 1 with each
              right endpoint. Augment each node of the tree with some extra information to
              maintain the point of maximum overlap.)

           14-2 Josephus permutation
           We deﬁne the Josephus problem as follows. Suppose that n people form a circle
           and that we are given a positive integer m  n. Beginning with a designated
           ﬁrst person, we proceed around the circle, removing every mth person. After each
           person is removed, counting continues around the circle that remains. This process
           continues until we have removed all n people. The order in which the people are
           removed from the circle deﬁnes the .n; m/-Josephus permutation of the integers
           1; 2; : : : ; n. For example, the .7; 3/-Josephus permutation is h3; 6; 2; 7; 5; 1; 4i.

           a. Suppose that m is a constant. Describe an O.n/-time algorithm that, given an
              integer n, outputs the .n; m/-Josephus permutation.

           b. Suppose that m is not a constant. Describe an O.n lg n/-time algorithm that,
              given integers n and m, outputs the .n; m/-Josephus permutation.


Chapter notes

           In their book, Preparata and Shamos [282] describe several of the interval trees
           that appear in the literature, citing work by H. Edelsbrunner (1980) and E. M.
           McCreight (1981). The book details an interval tree that, given a static database
           of n intervals, allows us to enumerate all k intervals that overlap a given query
           interval in O.k C lg n/ time.
