Chapter 25   All-Pairs Shortest Paths                                                 685

        0                                    if i D j ;
wij D     the weight of directed edge .i; j / if i ¤ j and .i; j / 2 E ;           (25.1)
          1                                   if i ¤ j and .i; j / 62 E :
We allow negative-weight edges, but we assume for the time being that the input
graph contains no negative-weight cycles.
   The tabular output of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms presented in this
chapter is an n n matrix D D .dij /, where entry dij contains the weight of a
shortest path from vertex i to vertex j . That is, if we let ı.i; j / denote the shortest-
path weight from vertex i to vertex j (as in Chapter 24), then dij D ı.i; j / at
termination.
   To solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an input adjacency matrix, we
need to compute not only the shortest-path weights but also a predecessor matrix
… D .ij /, where ij is NIL if either i D j or there is no path from i to j ,
and otherwise ij is the predecessor of j on some shortest path from i. Just as
the predecessor subgraph G from Chapter 24 is a shortest-paths tree for a given
source vertex, the subgraph induced by the ith row of the … matrix should be a
shortest-paths tree with root i. For each vertex i 2 V , we deﬁne the predecessor
subgraph of G for i as G;i D .V;i ; E;i / , where
V;i D fj 2 V W ij ¤ NILg [ fig
and
E;i D f.ij ; j / W j 2 V;i  figg :
If G;i is a shortest-paths tree, then the following procedure, which is a modiﬁed
version of the P RINT-PATH procedure from Chapter 22, prints a shortest path from
vertex i to vertex j .

P RINT-A LL -PAIRS -S HORTEST-PATH .…; i; j /
1 if i == j
2      print i
3 elseif ij == NIL
4      print “no path from” i “to” j “exists”
5 else P RINT-A LL -PAIRS -S HORTEST-PATH .…; i; ij /
6      print j

In order to highlight the essential features of the all-pairs algorithms in this chapter,
we won’t cover the creation and properties of predecessor matrices as extensively
as we dealt with predecessor subgraphs in Chapter 24. Some of the exercises cover
the basics.
