           10.3 Implementing pointers and objects                                              241


           10.2-6
           The dynamic-set operation U NION takes two disjoint sets S1 and S2 as input, and
           it returns a set S D S1 [ S2 consisting of all the elements of S1 and S2 . The
           sets S1 and S2 are usually destroyed by the operation. Show how to support U NION
           in O.1/ time using a suitable list data structure.

           10.2-7
           Give a ‚.n/-time nonrecursive procedure that reverses a singly linked list of n
           elements. The procedure should use no more than constant storage beyond that
           needed for the list itself.

           10.2-8 ?
           Explain how to implement doubly linked lists using only one pointer value x:np per
           item instead of the usual two (next and pre). Assume that all pointer values can be
           interpreted as k-bit integers, and deﬁne x:np to be x:np D x:next XOR x:pre,
           the k-bit “exclusive-or” of x:next and x:pre. (The value NIL is represented by 0.)
           Be sure to describe what information you need to access the head of the list. Show
           how to implement the S EARCH, I NSERT, and D ELETE operations on such a list.
           Also show how to reverse such a list in O.1/ time.



10.3 Implementing pointers and objects

           How do we implement pointers and objects in languages that do not provide them?
           In this section, we shall see two ways of implementing linked data structures with-
           out an explicit pointer data type. We shall synthesize objects and pointers from
           arrays and array indices.

           A multiple-array representation of objects
           We can represent a collection of objects that have the same attributes by using an
           array for each attribute. As an example, Figure 10.5 shows how we can implement
           the linked list of Figure 10.3(a) with three arrays. The array key holds the values
           of the keys currently in the dynamic set, and the pointers reside in the arrays next
           and pre. For a given array index x, the array entries keyŒx, nextŒx, and preŒx
           represent an object in the linked list. Under this interpretation, a pointer x is simply
           a common index into the key, next, and pre arrays.
              In Figure 10.3(a), the object with key 4 follows the object with key 16 in the
           linked list. In Figure 10.5, key 4 appears in keyŒ2, and key 16 appears in keyŒ5,
           and so nextŒ5 D 2 and preŒ2 D 5. Although the constant NIL appears in the next
