Problems for Chapter 16                                                              447


b. Suppose that the available coins are in the denominations that are powers of c,
   i.e., the denominations are c 0 ; c 1 ; : : : ; c k for some integers c > 1 and k  1.
   Show that the greedy algorithm always yields an optimal solution.

c. Give a set of coin denominations for which the greedy algorithm does not yield
   an optimal solution. Your set should include a penny so that there is a solution
   for every value of n.

d. Give an O.nk/-time algorithm that makes change for any set of k different coin
   denominations, assuming that one of the coins is a penny.

16-2 Scheduling to minimize average completion time
Suppose you are given a set S D fa1 ; a2 ; : : : ; an g of tasks, where task ai re-
quires pi units of processing time to complete, once it has started. You have one
computer on which to run these tasks, and the computer can run only one task at a
time. Let ci be the completion time of task ai , that is, the time at which task ai com-
pletes processing. P Your goal is to minimize the average completion time, that is,
                       n
to minimize .1=n/ i D1 ci . For example, suppose there are two tasks, a1 and a2 ,
with p1 D 3 and p2 D 5, and consider the schedule in which a2 runs ﬁrst, followed
by a1 . Then c2 D 5, c1 D 8, and the average completion time is .5 C 8/=2 D 6:5.
If task a1 runs ﬁrst, however, then c1 D 3, c2 D 8, and the average completion
time is .3 C 8/=2 D 5:5.

a. Give an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average com-
   pletion time. Each task must run non-preemptively, that is, once task ai starts, it
   must run continuously for pi units of time. Prove that your algorithm minimizes
   the average completion time, and state the running time of your algorithm.

b. Suppose now that the tasks are not all available at once. That is, each task
   cannot start until its release time ri . Suppose also that we allow preemption, so
   that a task can be suspended and restarted at a later time. For example, a task ai
   with processing time pi D 6 and release time ri D 1 might start running at
   time 1 and be preempted at time 4. It might then resume at time 10 but be
   preempted at time 11, and it might ﬁnally resume at time 13 and complete at
   time 15. Task ai has run for a total of 6 time units, but its running time has been
   divided into three pieces. In this scenario, ai ’s completion time is 15. Give
   an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average completion
   time in this new scenario. Prove that your algorithm minimizes the average
   completion time, and state the running time of your algorithm.
